Arkady and Boris Strugatsky
Monday starts on Saturday
Series: NIICHAVO - 1But what is strange, what is most incomprehensible, is how authors can take such plots,
I confess, this is completely incomprehensible, that's for sure ... no, no, I don’t understand at all.
N. V. GogolStory one
THE FUSION AROUND THE SOFAChapter first
Teacher: Children, write down the sentence: "The fish was sitting on a tree."
Student: Do fish sit on trees?
Teacher: Well... It was a crazy fish.
School jokeI was approaching my destination. Around me, clinging to the very road, green
forest, occasionally giving way to clearings overgrown with yellow sedge. The sun has been setting for an hour now
still could not sit down and hung low over the horizon. The car rolled along a narrow road covered with crisp gravel. I let large stones under the wheel, and every time they clanged in the trunk
and empty canisters rumbled.
On the right, two people came out of the forest, stepped onto the side of the road and stopped, looking in my direction. One of
them raised their hand. I let off the gas as I looked at them. They were, it seemed to me, hunters, young
people maybe a little older than me. I liked their faces and I stopped. The one who raised his hand stuck his swarthy hook-nosed face into the car and asked, smiling:
- You will not give us a lift to Solovets?
The second, with a red beard and no mustache, was also smiling, peering over his shoulder. Positive-
but they were nice people.
"Let's sit down," I said. - One forward, the other back, otherwise I have junk there, in the back
seat.
- Benefactor! - the hawk-nosed one said delightedly, took off his gun from his shoulder and sat down next to me.
The bearded man, looking hesitantly through the back door, said:
“Can I have a little of that here?”
I leaned over the back and helped him clear the space occupied by the sleeping bag and the rolled-up tent. He sat down delicately, placing the gun between his knees.
“Close the door better,” I said.
Everything went on as usual. The car started off. The hawk-nosed man turned back and spoke animatedly about the fact that it is much more pleasant to ride in a passenger car than to walk. The bearded man indistinctly agreed and kept slamming and slamming the door. “Pick up your raincoat,” I advised, looking at him in the mirror.
rear view. “Your coat is pinched.” Five minutes later, everything finally settled down. I asked: "Before
Solovets ten kilometers? “Yes,” answered the hawk-nosed one. - Or a little more. The road is true
unimportant - for trucks. “The road is quite decent,” I objected. - I was promised that I
I won't go." “You can drive along this road even in autumn.” - “Here - perhaps, but from Korobets
- ground. “This year the summer is dry, everything has dried up.” - "Under Zatonya, they say, it's raining," remarked
bearded in the back seat. "Who is speaking?" asked the hawk-nosed one. Merlin speaks. They
for some reason they laughed. I pulled out cigarettes, lit a cigarette and offered them a treat. "Clara's Factory"
Zetkin,” said the hawk-nosed one, looking at the pack. Are you from Leningrad? - "Yes". - "Are you traveling?"
“I'm traveling,” I said. “Are you from here?” “Indigenous,” said the hawk-nosed one. "I'm from Murmansk," the bearded man said. “For Leningrad, probably, Solovets and Murmansk are one and the same:
North,” said the hawk-nosed one. "No, why not," I said politely. “Are you going to stop in Solovets?” asked the hawk-nosed one. “Of course,” I said. “I am going to Solovets.” “Do you have relatives there or
familiar?" “No,” I said. I'll just wait guys. They go along the coast, and Solovets is our dot
rendezvous."
Ahead, I saw a large scattering of stones, slowed down and said: "Hold on tight." The car shook and jumped. Hook-nosed bruised his nose on the barrel of a gun. The motor roared, the stones beat in
bottom. "Poor car," said the hawk-nosed one. “What to do…” I said. “Not everyone would go
such a road in your car. “I would go,” I said. The spill is over. "Oh, it's not yours.
car," the hook-nosed man guessed. “Well, how do I get a car! It's a rental." “Understood,” he said.
hook-nosed, as it seemed to me, disappointed. I felt hurt. “What’s the point of buying a car to drive on asphalt? Where there is asphalt, there is nothing interesting, and where it is interesting, there is no asphalt.” “Yes, of course,” the hook-nosed man agreed politely. "It's stupid, in my opinion, to do
from the idol car,” I said. “Stupid,” said the bearded man. But not everyone thinks so. We talked
about cars and came to the conclusion that if you really buy anything, it's the GAZ-69, an all-terrain vehicle, but they,
unfortunately not for sale. Then the hawk-nosed one asked: “Where do you work?” I answered. “Colossal! exclaimed the hunchback. - Programmer! We need a programmer. Listen, leave your institute and come to us!” “What do you have?” “What do we have?” - asked the hook-nosed
turning around. "Aldan-3," said the bearded one. “Rich car,” I said. “And does it work well?”
- "Yes, how can I tell you ..." - "Understood," - I said. “Actually, it has not yet been debugged,” said the bearded one. - Stay with us, debug ... "-" And we will arrange the translation for you in no time, "- added the hook-nosed one. "What are you doing?" I asked. “Like all science,” said the hawk-nosed one. “Human happiness.” “Understood,” I said. “Something with space?” “And with space too,” he said.
hook-nosed. “They don’t look for good from good,” I said. “A capital city and a decent salary,” the bearded man said in a low voice, but I heard him. “No need,” I said. “You don’t have to measure for money.” - "Not really,
I was joking,” said the bearded man. “He's joking like that,” said the hawk-nosed one. - More interesting than ours
you won't be anywhere." - "Why do you think so?" - "Sure". “I'm not sure.” The hawk-nosed chuckled. “We will talk about this again,” he said. “Will you stay in Solovets for a long time?” - "Two days
maximum". “We’ll talk on the second day.” The bearded one said: “Personally, I see in this a finger
fate - walked through the forest and met a programmer. I think you are doomed." - "You really
do you need a programmer? I asked. "We desperately need a programmer." “I'll talk to the guys,” I promised. “I know those who are dissatisfied.” “We don't need just any programmer,” said the hawk-nosed one. “Programmers are a scarce people, they are spoiled, but we need an unspoilt one.” - "Yes it
harder,” I said. The hawk-nosed began to bend his fingers: “We need a programmer: a - not spoiled-
ny, be - volunteer, tse - to agree to live in a hostel ... "-" De, - picked up the bearded one, -
one hundred and twenty rubles. “What about wings? I asked. “Or, shall we say, lights around the head?” One in a thousand!" “We only need one,” said the hawk-nosed one. “And if there are only nine hundred of them?” “Nine-tenths agree.”
The forest parted, we crossed the bridge and rolled between the potato fields. "Nine
hours,” said the hawk-nosed one. “Where are you going to spend the night?” “I'll sleep in the car. Shops near
until what time do they work for you?" “Our shops are already closed,” said the hawk-nosed one. "It is possible in
hostel, - said the bearded man. “I have an empty bed in my room.” “You can’t drive up to the hostel,” said the hawk-nosed man thoughtfully. “Yes, perhaps,” said the bearded man, and for some reason laughed.
“The car can be parked near the police,” said the hawk-nosed one. “Yes, this is nonsense,” said the bearded man. - I'm talking nonsense, and you follow me. How will he get into the hostel? “Y-yeah, hell,” said the hawk-nosed one. “Really, if you don’t work for a day, you forget about all these things.” – “Maybe
maybe transgress it? “Well, well,” said the hawk-nosed one. This is not your sofa. And you are not Cristobal Junta, and neither am I ... "
“Don't worry,” I said. I'll sleep in the car, not the first time.
I suddenly felt like sleeping on sheets. I've been sleeping in the bedroom for four nights
bag.
“Listen,” said the hook-nosed one, “ho-ho!” Out of the knife!
- Right! exclaimed the bearded man. - On Lukomorye it!
"By God, I'll sleep in the car," I said.
“You will spend the night in the house,” said the hawk-nosed one, “on relatively clean linen. Should we
thank you somehow...
“It’s not a fifty kopeck for you to poke,” said the bearded one.
We entered the city. Ancient strong fences stretched out, powerful log cabins made of giant blackened logs, with narrow windows, with carved platbands, with wooden cockerels on
roofs. I came across several dirty brick buildings with iron doors, the sight of which brought the semi-familiar word "storage" out of my memory. The street was straight and wide and was called Mira Avenue. Ahead, closer to the center, one could see two-story cinder-block houses with open
public gardens.
“Next alley to the right,” said the hawk-nosed one.
I turned on the turn signal, braked and turned right. The road here is overgrown with grass,
but at some gate stood, crouching, a brand new "Zaporozhets". House numbers hung over the gates, and the numbers were barely visible on the rusty tin of the signs. The lane was elegantly called: “St.
Lukomorye. It was not wide and wedged between heavy old fences, set up, probably
back in the days when Swedish and Norwegian pirates roamed here.
“Stop,” said the hawk-nosed one. I braked and he bumped his nose against the barrel of the gun again. - Now
yes,” he said, rubbing his nose. - You wait for me, and I'll go and arrange everything.
“Really, it’s not worth it,” I said for the last time.
- No talking. Volodya, keep him at gunpoint.
Hook-nosed got out of the car and, bending down, squeezed through the low gate. Behind the tall
the gray fence of the house was not visible. The gates were absolutely phenomenal, as in a locomotive depot, on rusty iron hinges weighing a pound. I read the signs with amazement. There were three. On the left
In the gate, a solid blue signboard with silver letters sternly gleamed with thick glass:
NIICHAVO
Hut on chicken legs
Monument of Solovetsky antiquity
A rusty tin plate hung on top of the right collar: “St. Lukomorye, d. No. 13, N. K.
Gorynych”, and under it was a piece of plywood with an inscription at random in ink:
CAT DOES NOT WORK
Administration
- What CAT? I asked. – Committee of Defense Technology?
The bearded man chuckled.
"You don't have to worry," he said. “It’s funny here, but everything will be all right.I got out of the car and began to wipe the windshield. Above my head they were suddenly imported. I
looked. On the gates he anointed himself, making himself comfortable, a gigantic one - I have never seen such
- black-gray, with divorces, cat. Sitting down, he looked at me with his yellow eyes full and indifferent. “Kiss-kiss-kiss,” I said mechanically. The cat politely and coldly opened its toothy mouth,
hoarse throat sound, and then turned away and began to look inside the courtyard. From there, behind the fence, the voice
hunchbacked said:
- Vasily, my friend, let me disturb you.
The bolt screeched. The cat got up and silently disappeared into the yard. The gates swayed heavily, resounded
a terrifying creak and crack, and the left gate slowly opened. A face red from exertion appeared
hook-nosed.
- Benefactor! he called. - Come on in!
I got back in the car and drove slowly into the yard. The yard was vast, in the depths stood a house made of
thick logs, and in front of the house was a squat, immense oak, wide, dense, with a dense crown that obscured the roof. From the gate to the house, skirting the oak, there was a path lined with stone slabs. To the right of the path was a garden, and to the left, in the middle of the lawn, rose a well
a log house with a gate, black from antiquity and covered with moss.
I parked the car on the side, turned off the engine and got out. Bearded Volodya also got out and,
leaning the gun against the side, he began to adjust the backpack.
“Here you are at home,” he said.
Hook-nosed with a creak and crackling shut the gate, while I, feeling rather awkward, looked around, not knowing what to do.
- And here is the hostess! cried the bearded man. - How are you, grandma, Naina is the light of Kievna!
The owner must have been over a hundred. She walked towards us slowly, leaning on a knotted stick, dragging
feet in felt boots with galoshes. Her face was dark brown; from a continuous mass of wrinkles, a nose protruded forward and downward, crooked and sharp, like a scimitar, and the eyes were pale, dull, as if covered with thorns.
“Hello, hello, granddaughters,” she said in an unexpectedly sonorous bass. - This means,
and there will be a new programmer? Hello father, welcome!
I bowed, knowing that I needed to keep quiet. Grandmother's head over a black downy shawl,
tied under the chin, was covered with a cheerful nylon scarf with multi-colored
images of the Atomium and with inscriptions in different languages: "International Exhibition in Brussels".
A sparse gray stubble protruded from his chin and under his nose. The grandmother was dressed in a wadded sleeveless jacket and
black cloth dress.
- In this way, Naina Kievna! said the hawk-nosed one, coming up and wiping the rust from his palms. - We need to arrange for our new employee for two nights. Let me introduce you... mmm...
“But don’t,” said the old woman, examining me intently. - I see it myself. Privalov Alexander Ivanovich, one thousand nine hundred and thirty-eighth, male, Russian, member of the Komsomol, no, no,
did not participate, was not, does not have, but it will be for you, diamond, a long journey and interest in a state-owned house, and
you, diamond, should be afraid of a red-haired, unkind person, but gild the pen, yakhontovy ...
- Hmm! the hawk-nosed one said loudly, and the grandmother broke off. There was an awkward silence.
- You can just call Sasha ... - I squeezed out a pre-prepared phrase.
“And where do I put it?” Grandma asked.
“In the storeroom, of course,” the hawk-nosed man said somewhat irritably.
- And who will answer?
- Naina Kievna! .. - the hawk-nosed roared with the peals of a provincial tragedian, grabbed the old woman
by the hand and dragged to the house. They could be heard arguing: "After all, we agreed! .." - "... And
if he steals something? ..” - “Yes, you be quiet! It's a programmer, right? Komsomolets!
Scientist! .. "-" And if he pokes? .. "
I shyly turned to Volodya. Volodya giggled.
“It’s kind of awkward,” I said.
Don't worry, everything will be fine...
He wanted to say something else, but then the grandmother yelled wildly: “A sofa, a sofa! ..” I shuddered and
said:
“You know, I should probably go, huh?
- Out of the question! Volodya said decisively. - It'll all work out. Grandma just needs
bribe, and Roman and I don't have cash.
“I will pay,” I said. Now I really wanted to leave: I can’t stand these so-called
life conflicts.
Volodya shook his head.
- Nothing like this. He's already on his way. Everything is fine.
Hook-nosed Roman came up to us, took my hand and said:
- Well, everything is fine. Went.
“Listen, it’s uncomfortable somehow,” I said. She doesn't have to, after all...
But we were already on our way home.
“I have to, I have to,” Roman said.
We rounded the oak tree and reached the back porch. Roman pushed open the leatherette-lined door, and we
found themselves in a hallway, spacious and clean, but poorly lit. The old woman was waiting for us with her hands folded
on his stomach and pursed his lips. When she saw us, she boomed vindictively:
- And a receipt to immediately! .. So, they say, and so: they supposedly accepted this and that from such and such, which handed over the above to the undersigned ...
Roman howled softly, and we entered the room allotted to me. It was a cool room with one window, hung with a cotton curtain. Roman said in a tense voice:
- Relax and make yourself at home.
The old woman from the hall immediately inquired jealously:
“But they don’t click their teeth?”
Roman, without turning around, barked:
- Don't chirp! They tell you there are no teeth.
- Then let's go, write a receipt ...
Roman raised his eyebrows, rolled his eyes, bared his teeth and shook his head, but went out anyway. I looked around. There was little furniture in the room. By the window stood a massive table covered with shabby gray
fringed tablecloth, in front of the table - a rickety stool. Near the bare log wall there was a large sofa, on the other wall, covered with wallpaper of various sizes, there was a hanger with some kind of junk (quilted jackets, fur coats that came out, tattered caps and earflaps). A large Russian stove, shining with fresh whitewash, protruded into the room, and opposite in the corner hung a large dim mirror in a shabby
frame. The floor was scraped and covered with striped rugs.
Behind the wall they muttered in two voices: the old woman bassed on one note, Roman's voice rose and fell. “Tablecloth, inventory number two hundred and forty-five ...” - “You still write down every floorboard! ..” - “Dinner table ...” - “Will you also write down the oven? ..” - “Order is needed ... Sofa ...”
I went to the window and drew back the curtain. There was an oak tree outside the window, nothing else was visible. I
began to look at the oak. It was apparently a very ancient plant. The bark on it was gray and somehow
dead, and the monstrous roots that crawled out of the ground were covered with red and white lichen. "AND
write down another oak!” Roman said behind the wall. There was a plump greasy book on the windowsill, I
thoughtlessly leafed through it, moved away from the window and sat down on the sofa. And now I want to sleep. I thought,
that he had been driving for fourteen hours today, that he should not have been in such a hurry, that his back
it hurts me, but everything is confused in my head, that I don’t give a damn about this tedious old woman, and it would soon be over and I could lie down and fall asleep ...
- Well, - said Roman, appearing on the threshold. - The formalities are over. - He waved his hand.
with splayed fingers smeared with ink. - Our fingers are tired: we wrote, we wrote ... Go to bed. We leave, and you calmly go to bed. What are you doing tomorrow?
"I'm waiting," I answered languidly.
- Where?
- Here. And near the post office.
“You won’t leave tomorrow, will you?”
- Tomorrow is unlikely ... Most likely - the day after tomorrow.
"Then we'll see you again." Our love is ahead. He smiled, waved his hand and left. I
lazily thought that it would be necessary to see him off and say goodbye to Volodya, and lay down. Just then an old woman entered the room. I wake up. The old woman looked at me for some time.
“I’m afraid, father, that you’ll start to bark your teeth,” she said with concern.
“I won’t poke,” I said wearily. - I'm going to sleep.
- And lie down and sleep ... Just pay the money and sleep ...
I reached into my back pocket for my wallet.
- How much do I have to pay?
The old woman raised her eyes to the ceiling.
- We'll put a ruble for the room ... Fifty dollars for bed linen - it's mine, not state-owned. Behind
two nights it comes out three rubles...
I know…
I handed her a five.
“So far, a ruble from generosity,” I said. - And it will be seen there.
The old woman quickly grabbed the money and walked away, muttering something about change. She wasn't pretty
for a long time, and I already wanted to give up both change and linen, but she returned and laid a handful of dirty coppers on the table.
“Here’s your change, father,” she said. - Exactly a ruble, you can not count.
“I won’t count,” I said. - What about underwear?
- I'll make a bed now. You go out into the yard, take a walk, and I will make a bed.
I went out, pulling out cigarettes as I went. The sun finally set, and the white night came. Somewhere
dogs barked. I sat down under an oak tree on a bench that had grown into the ground, lit a cigarette and began to look at the pale, starless sky. A cat appeared noiselessly from somewhere, looked at me with fluorescent eyes, then quickly climbed up the oak tree and disappeared into the dark foliage. I immediately forgot about him and shuddered when he was brought somewhere upstairs. Debris fell on my head. "To you ..." - I said aloud and
began to shake off. I was extremely anxious to sleep. An old woman came out of the house, not noticing me, wandered to
well. I understood this to mean that the bed was ready, and returned to the room.
The bad old lady made a bed for me on the floor. Well, no, I thought, locked the door on the latch, dragged the bed onto the sofa and began to undress. A gloomy light fell from the window, a cat bustled noisily on the oak.
I shook my head, shaking the debris out of my hair. It was strange garbage, unexpected: large dry fish scales. It will be a good sleep, I thought, I fell on the pillow and immediately fell asleep.Chapter Two
... The empty house has turned into a den of foxes and badgers, and therefore strange
werewolves and ghosts.
A. UedaI woke up in the middle of the night because they were talking in the room. The two were talking, barely
audible whisper. The voices were very similar, but one was a little choked and hoarse, and
the other showed extreme irritation.
"Don't wheeze," he whispered, irritated. – Can you not wheeze?
“I can,” the strangled man replied and snorted.
“Be quiet…” he hissed, irritated.
“A hoarse one,” explained the strangled man. “Smoker's morning cough…” He suffocated again.
“Get out of here,” said the irritated one.
Yes, he's still sleeping...
- Who is he? Where did it fall from?
– How do I know?
- That's a shame ... Well, just phenomenally unlucky.
Again, the neighbors can not sleep, I thought awake. I imagined that I was at home. At home in my neighbors
two physicist brothers who love to work at night. By two in the morning they run out of cigarettes, and then they climb into my room and begin to fumble, banging furniture and arguing.
I grabbed a pillow and threw it into the void. Something crashed down with a noise, and it became quiet.
“Give back the pillow,” I said, “and get out. Cigarettes on the table.
The sound of my own voice woke me completely. I sat down. Dogs barked dejectedly, behind the wall
the old woman snored ominously. I finally remembered where I was. There was no one in the room. In the twilight light, I saw my pillow on the floor and the junk that had fallen from the hanger. Grandma will tear off her head
I thought and jumped up. The floor was cold and I stepped onto the rugs. Grandma stopped snoring. I
froze. The floorboards crackled, something crunched and rustled in the corners. Grandma whistled deafeningly
and snored again. I picked up the pillow and threw it on the sofa. The junk smelled of dog. The hanger fell off the nail and hung sideways. I corrected it and began to pick up junk. As soon as I hung the last
the cloak, like a hanger, broke off and, shuffling against the wallpaper, again hung on one nail. Grandma stopped
snoring, and I broke out in a cold sweat. Somewhere nearby, a rooster crowed. Into your soup, I thought with hatred. The old woman behind the wall began to spin, the springs creaked and clicked. I waited on one leg. In the courtyard, someone said quietly: "It's time to sleep, we've been sitting too long today." The voice was
young, feminine. “Sleep like that,” said another voice. A long yawn was heard. -
Won't you splash anymore today?" - "Something's cold. Come on guys." It became quiet. Grandma for-
snarled and grunted, and I cautiously returned to the sofa. I'll get up early in the morning and fix everything
should...
I lay down on my right side, pulled the blanket over my ear, closed my eyes and suddenly realized that I didn’t feel like sleeping at all - I wanted to eat. Ayyyyyyy, I thought. It was necessary to urgently take action, and I
accepted.
Here, let's say, is a system of two integral equations of the type of stellar statistics equations; both
unknown functions are under the integral. Of course, one can only solve numerically, say, at BESM... I remembered our BESM. Custard color control panel. Zhenya puts
on this panel a bundle of newspaper and unhurriedly unfolds it. "What do you have?" - "I have with cheese and
sausage." With Polish half-smoked, circles. “Hey, you need to get married! I have cutlets, with garlic, homemade. And pickles." No, two cucumbers ... Four cutlets and for good measure
four strong pickled cucumbers. And four slices of bread and butter...
I threw back the covers and sat up. Maybe there is something left in the car? No, everything that was there, I
ate. There was a cookbook for Valka's mother, who lives in Lezhnev. How is it there ... Sauce
pickan. Half a glass of vinegar, two onions ... and pepper. Served with meat dishes ... As I remember now: with small steaks. What a meanness, I thought, not just to steaks, but to small steaks. I jumped up and ran to the window. The night air smelled distinctly of little steaks. From somewhere in the depths of the subconscious surfaced: “He was served ordinary
dishes in restaurants, such as: sour cabbage soup, brains with peas, pickled cucumber (I took a sip) and the eternal puff sweet pie ... ”I would be distracted, I thought, and took the book from the windowsill. It was Alex
Tolstoy, Gloomy Morning. I opened at random. “Makhno, breaking the sardine key, pulled out of his pocket
mother-of-pearl knife with fifty blades and continued to wield it, opening tins of pineapples (bad business, I thought), French pate, with lobsters, from which there was a sharp smell around the room. I carefully put the book down and sat down at the table on a stool. Delicious food suddenly appeared in the room
pungent smell: it must have smelled like lobster. I began to wonder why I had never tasted lobster until now. Or, say, oysters. In Dickens's, everyone eats oysters, wields folding knives, cuts off thick slices of bread, spreads it with butter ... I began to nervously smooth the tablecloth. On the tablecloth
unwashed spots were visible. They ate a lot and deliciously. Ate lobsters and brains with peas. They ate small steaks with pican sauce. Large and medium steaks were also eaten. Satiated puffed
satisfactorily clicked their teeth ... I had nothing to take the rap from, and I began to click my teeth.
I must have done it loud and hungry, because the old woman behind the wall creaked the bed,
she muttered angrily, rattled something, and suddenly came into my room. She wore a long gray
shirt, and in her hands she carried a plate, and the real, and not fantastic, aroma of food immediately spread in the room. The old woman smiled. She set the plate right in front of me and sweetly boomed:
- Take a bite, father, Alexander Ivanovich. Eat what God sent, sent with me ...
“What are you, what are you, Naina Kievna,” I muttered, “why did you bother yourself so much ...
But in my hand I already had a fork with a bone handle from somewhere, and I began to eat, and the grandmother stood
nearby, nodding and saying:
- Eat, father, eat in good health ...
I ate everything. It was a hot potato with ghee.
“Naina Kievna,” I said earnestly, “you saved me from starvation.
- Have you eaten? said Naina Kievna somehow unfriendly.
- Ate great. Thank you very much! You cannot imagine...
“What can’t be imagined,” she interrupted, already completely irritated. Have you eaten, I say?
Well, give me a plate here ... A plate, I say, come on!
“For…please,” I said.
- "Please, please" ... Feed you here for please ...
“I can pay,” I said, getting angry.
- "Pay, pay" ... - She went to the door. What if they don't pay for it at all? And there's nothing
was lying...
- That is, how is it - to lie?
- And so lie! You said yourself that you won't tinkle…” She stopped talking and hid behind the door.
What is she? I thought. Some strange grandmother ... Maybe she noticed the hanger? Was
you can hear her creaking with springs, tossing and turning on the bed and grumbling with displeasure. Then she sang
softly to some barbaric motive: “I’ll ride, lie down, having eaten Ivashka’s meat ...” From
the windows were cold at night. I shivered, got up to return to the sofa, and then it dawned on me that I had locked the door before going to bed. Confused, I went to the door and stretched out my hand to check the latch, but as soon as my fingers touched the cold iron, everything swam before my eyes. It turned out that I was lying on the couch, with my nose buried in the pillow, and with my fingers I felt
cold log wall.
For some time I lay dying, until I realized that somewhere nearby an old woman was snoring, and they were talking in the room. Someone instructively spoke in an undertone:
- The elephant is the largest animal of all living on earth. He has a big one on his snout
a piece of meat called a trunk because it is empty and stretched out like a pipe. He stretches and bends it in all sorts of ways and uses it instead of a hand...
Cold with curiosity, I cautiously turned to my right side. The room was still empty. The voice continued even more instructively:
– Wine used in moderation is very good for the stomach; but when you drink too much of it, it produces vapors that degrade a person to the level of senseless beasts. Have you seen sometimes
drunkards and also remember that just disgust that you had for them ...
I jumped up and swung my legs off the couch. The voice is silent. It seemed to me that they were talking from somewhere behind the wall. Everything in the room was the same, even the hanger, to my surprise, hung on
place. And, to my surprise, I was very hungry again.
“Tincture ex vitro antimony,” a voice announced suddenly. I started. - Magiftherium Antimon Angelii Salae. Bafilia oleum vitry antimonia alexiterium antimoniale! - I heard
obvious giggle. - That's what nonsense! said the voice, and went on with a howl:
these eyes, still being opened, will no longer see the sun, but do not let it close without a sympathetic
notices of my forgiveness and bliss ... This is the "Spirit or Moral Thoughts of the Glorious Jung, extracted from his nightly reflections." Sold in St. Petersburg and Riga in bookstores
Sveshnikov's shops for two rubles in a folder. – Someone sobbed. "That's nonsense, too," said the voice, and
said with expression:
Ranks, beauty, wealth,
All the pleasures of this life
Flying, weakening, disappearing,
This is decay, and happiness is false!
Infections gnaw at the heart
And glory cannot be kept ...
Now I understand where they said. The voice came from a corner where a misty mirror hung.
“And now,” said the voice, “the next. “Everything is a single I, this I is the world I. Unity with ignorance, which comes from the eclipse of the light of I, disappears with the development of spirituality.”
- And where does this nonsense come from? I asked. I didn't expect an answer. I was sure that I was dreaming.
“Sayings from the Upanishads,” the voice answered readily.
What are the Upanishads? “I was no longer sure I was dreaming.
“I don't know,” the voice said.
I got up and tiptoed over to the mirror. I didn't see my reflection. The cloudy glass reflected the curtain, the corner of the stove, and many things in general. But I wasn't in it.
- What's the matter? the voice asked. - Have questions?
- Who is speaking? I asked looking behind the mirror. Behind the mirror there was a lot of dust and dead
spiders. Then I pressed my left eye with my index finger. It was an old rule for recognizing hallucinations, which I read in the fascinating book by V. V. Bitner "To believe or not to believe?". It is enough to press a finger on the eyeball, and all real objects - unlike
hallucinations - bifurcate. The mirror split in two, and my reflection appeared in it - sleepy,
anxious face. It blew down my legs. Cursing my fingers, I went to the window and looked out.
There was no one outside the window, not even an oak tree. I rubbed my eyes and looked again. I distinctly
I saw right in front of me a mossy well log house with a gate, a gate and my car at the gate. I'm still asleep, I thought calmly. My gaze fell on the windowsill, on the disheveled book. In pro-
in my last dream it was the third volume of the Pain, now on the cover I read: “P. I. Karpov.
Creativity of the mentally ill and its influence on the development of science, art and technology. Teeth chattering from the chill, I leafed through the book and looked through the colored inserts. Then I read "Verse #2":
In the circle of clouds high
black-winged sparrow
Trembling and lonely
Soars quickly above the ground.
He flies at night
Illuminated by moonlight,
And, dismayed by nothing,
He sees everything below him.
Proud, predatory, furious
And flying like a shadow
Eyes glow like day.
The floor suddenly swayed under my feet. There was a piercing lingering creak, then, like the rumble of a distant earthquake, there was a roaring: “Ko-o… Ko-o… Ko-o…” The hut shook like a boat on the waves. The yard outside the window moved to the side, and from under the window climbed out and stuck
claws into the ground, a gigantic chicken leg, made deep furrows in the grass and disappeared again. Floor
lurched steeply, I felt that I was falling, grabbed something soft with my hands, hit my side and
head and fell off the couch. I was lying on the rugs, clutching the pillow that had fallen along with
me. The room was completely light. Outside the window, someone was clearing his throat.
“Well, well…” said a well-trained male voice. - In some there was a kingdom, in some state there lived a king, by name ... me-eh ... well, in the end, it doesn’t matter. Let's say, mne... Poluekt... He had three sons, princes. The first one… me-uh… The third one was a fool, but the first one?..
Bending down like a soldier under fire, I crept up to the window and looked out. The oak was there.
With his back to him, the cat Vasily stood on his hind legs in deep thought. He had a water lily in his teeth. The cat looked at his feet and pulled: "Mne-uh ..." Then he shook his head,
he put his front paws behind his back and, stooping slightly, like assistant professor Dubino-Knyazhitsky at a lecture, walked with a smooth step away from the oak.
“Okay…” the cat said through clenched teeth. - There was a king and a queen. The king, the queen had
one son… Mne-eh… Fool, of course…
The cat spat out the flower in annoyance and rubbed his forehead, grimacing all over.
“A desperate situation,” he said. - I do remember something! “Ha ha ha! There will be something to eat: a horse for lunch, well done for dinner ... ”Where would it come from? And Ivan, you yourself understand - a fool, replies: "Oh, you filthy monster, not catching a white swan, but eat!" Then, of course - red-hot
an arrow, all three heads off, Ivan takes out three hearts and brings, cretin, home to his mother ... What
present! The cat laughed sardonically, then sighed. - There is another disease - sclerosis - he said.
He sighed again, turned back to the oak and sang: “Quack, quack, my little children! Quack, quack, pigeons! I… mne-uh… I soldered you with a tear… or rather, soldered you…” He sighed for the third time and walked in silence for a while. Coming up with the oak, he suddenly yelled unmusically: “Sweet bite is not
finished eating!.. "
He suddenly had a massive harp in his paws - I didn’t even notice where he got them. He desperately hit them with his paw and, clinging to the strings with his claws, yelled even louder, as if trying to drown out the music:
Dass im tannwald finster east,
Das macht das holts,
Das… meh… mein shatz… or katz?..
He fell silent and walked for some time, silently tapping on the strings. Then, softly, hesitantly, he sang:
Oh, I'm in the same garden,
I'll tell you the whole truth:
Oto so
Dig poppy.
He returned to the oak, leaned his harp against it, and scratched behind his ear with his back foot.
“Work, work, work,” he said. - Only work!
He put his paws behind his back again and walked to the left of the oak, muttering:
- It came to me, O great king, that in the glorious city of Baghdad there lived a tailor, named ...
He got on all fours, arched his back, and hissed angrily. - With these names I have especially
disgusting! Abu... Ali... Someone ibn someone... W-well, let's say Poluekt. Poluekt ibn…
me-uh… Poluektovich… I still don’t remember what happened to this tailor. Well, the dog is with him, let's start another ...
I lay on my stomach on the windowsill and, sighing, watched the unfortunate Vasily wander around the oak, now to the right, then to the left, muttering, clearing his throat, howling, mooing, becoming tense on
on all fours - in a word, it suffers unspeakably. The range of his knowledge was enormous. Not a single fairy tale
he did not know a single song more than half, but they were Russian, Ukrainian, West Slavic, German, English, in my opinion, even Japanese, Chinese and African fairy tales, legends, parables, ballads, songs, romances, ditties and refrains. Sclerosis made him furious,
several times he threw himself on the trunk of an oak and tore the bark with his claws, he hissed and spat, and his eyes
they burned like those of the devil, and the fluffy tail, thick as a log, now looked at the zenith, then convulsively
twitched, then whipped him on the sides. But the only song he sang to the end was
"Chizhik-Pyzhik", and the only fairy tale that he coherently told was "The House That Jack Built" in Marshak's translation, and even then with some cuts. Gradually - apparently from fatigue - his speech acquired an increasingly distinct cat accent. “And in poly, poly,” he sang, “himself
plow plow, a ... mne-e ... a ... mne-a-a-u! .. and behind that plow he himself ... mya-a-u-a-u!
Or Brode?.. ”In the end, he was completely exhausted, sat on his tail and sat there for a while, hanging his head. Then he meowed softly, sadly, took the harp under his arm and slowly hobbled along the dewy grass on three legs.
I climbed off the windowsill and dropped the book. I distinctly remember that the last time it was
"Creativity of the mentally ill", I was sure that this book fell on the floor. But I picked
put on the windowsill "Crimes Disclosure" by A. Swenson and O. Wendel. I stupidly opened it
I ran through several paragraphs at random, and at once it seemed to me that a strangled man was hanging on an oak tree. I
he raised his eyes apprehensively. A wet, silver-green shark's tail hung from the bottom branch of an oak tree.
The tail swayed heavily in the morning breeze.
I shied away and hit the back of my head on something hard. The telephone rang loudly. I looked around. I was lying
across the sofa, the blanket slipped from me to the floor, the morning sun beat through the window through the leaves of the oak.Chapter Three
It occurred to me that the usual interview with the devil or wizard could be successfully replaced
skillful use of the provisions of science.
H. J. WellsPhone rang. I rubbed my eyes, looked out the window (the oak was in place), looked at the hanger
(the hanger was also in place). Phone rang. Behind the wall, the old woman's room was quiet. Then I jumped to the floor, opened the door (the latch was in place) and went out into the hallway. Phone rang. He
stood on a shelf above a large tub - a very modern apparatus of white plastic, such
seen only in the cinema and in the office of our director. I picked up the phone.
- Hello...
- Who is this? asked a piercing female voice.
- And who do you need?
“Is that Iznakurnizh?”
- What?
- I say, is this a hut on kurnog or not? Who is speaking?
“Yes,” I said. - Hut. Who do you need?
"Oh hell," said a female voice. - Take the phone call.
- Let's.
- Write it down.
“One minute,” I said. I'll take a pencil and paper.
"Oh hell," said a female voice.
I brought a notebook and a collet pencil.
- I'm hearing you.
"Telephone number two hundred and six," said a woman's voice. - Citizen Gorynych Naina
Kiev…
- Not so fast ... Kiev ... Further?
“You are hereby… invited to… arrive today… the twenty-seventh of July… this year…
at midnight ... for the annual republican rally ... "Recorded?
- Recorded.
- “The first meeting ... will take place ... on Bald Mountain. Dress uniform. Use of mechanical transport ... at your own expense. Signature… head of the office… Ha… Um… Viy.”
- Who?
- Viy! Ha Em Wii.
- I don't understand.
- Viy! Hron Monadovich! What, you don't know the head of the office?
“I don't know,” I said. - Spell it out.
- Devilishness! Okay, spell it out: Werewolf - Incubus - Ibicus short ... Did you write it down?
“I think I wrote it down,” I said. - It turned out - Viy.
- Who?
- Viy!
- Do you have polyps? I don't understand!
- Vladimir! Ivan! Ivan short!
- So. Repeat phone call.
I repeated.
- Right. Passed Onuchkin. Who accepted?
- Privalov.
- Greetings, Privalov! How long have you been serving?
“Dogs serve,” I said angrily. - I am working.
- Well, well, work. We'll meet at the retreat.
There were horns. I hung up the phone and returned to the room. The morning was cool, I hastily
did the exercises and got dressed. What was happening seemed to me extremely curious. telephone message
strangely associated in my mind with night events, although I had no idea,
how. However, some ideas had already occurred to me, and my imagination was excited.
Everything that I happened to be a witness here was not completely unfamiliar to me, I read something about such cases somewhere and now I remembered that the behavior of people who fell into similar circumstances always seemed to me extraordinarily, irritatingly absurd. Instead of,
in order to make full use of the fascinating prospects opened up for them by a happy accident, they were frightened, tried to return to the ordinary. Some hero even conjured readers to stay away from the veil that separates our world from the unknown, frightening with spiritual and physical
injuries. I did not yet know how events would unfold, but I was already ready to plunge into them with enthusiasm.
Wandering around the room in search of a ladle or mug, I continued to reason. These shy people
I thought, like some experimental scientists, very hard working, very hardworking, but
completely unimaginative and therefore very cautious. Having obtained a non-trivial result,
they shy away from it, hurriedly explain it as the impurity of the experiment, and in fact walk away from it.
new, because they got too used to the old, comfortably laid within the limits of authoritative theory ... I was already considering some experiments with a flip book (it was still lying
on the windowsill and was now Aldridge's "Last Exile") with a talking mirror and a chirp. I had a few questions for the cat Vasily, and the mermaid living on the oak was of some interest, although at times it seemed to me that I did dream about her. I
I have nothing against mermaids, but I can’t imagine how they can climb trees ... although, with
the other side, scales?..
I found a ladle on a tub under the telephone, but there was no water in the tub, and I went to
well. The sun has already risen quite high. Cars were honking somewhere, a policeman was heard
a whistle, a helicopter swam in the sky with a solid rumble. I went to the well and, with satisfaction, having found a crumpled tin pail on a chain, began to unwind the gate. The tub, tapping on the walls, went
into the black depth. There was a splash, the chain stretched. I turned the gate and looked at my Moskvich. At
the car had a tired, dusty look, the windshield was smeared with midges that had smashed to smithereens on it. It will be necessary to add water to the radiator, I thought. And generally speaking…
The tub seemed very heavy to me. When I put it on the log house, a huge pike head popped out of the water, green and all kind of mossy. I jumped back.
- Will you drag me to the market again? - very okaya, said the pike. I was dumbfounded silent. - Give me
you give me peace, insatiable! How much can I? .. I’ll calm down a little, I’ll try to rest and take a nap
tashshit! I’m not young anymore, I’ll be older than you ... my gills are also not in order ...
It was very strange to watch her speak. Just like a pike in a puppet theater, she
with might and main opened and closed her toothy mouth in an unpleasant discrepancy with the uttered sounds. She uttered the last phrase with a convulsive clenching of her jaw.
“And the air is bad for me,” she continued. "I'm going to die, what are you going to do?" Everything is stinginess
yours, woman and foolishness ... You save everything, but for what you save - you don’t know yourself ... On the last reform, that
how did you get burned? That's it! And Catherine's? Pasted the chests! And kerenki-ta, kerenki! After all
stoked the stove with kerenki ...
“You see,” I said, recovering a little.
– Oh, who is it? - scared pike.
“I… I'm here by chance… I intended to wash a little.
- Wash up! And I thought - again the old woman. I don't see it, it's old. Yes, and the refractive index in
air, they say, quite different. I ordered air glasses for myself, but I lost it, I can’t find it ... And who
will you?
“Tourist,” I said curtly.
- Ah, a tourist ... And I thought - again a grandmother. What is she doing to me! Catch me, drag me
to the market and sells there, supposedly in the ear. Well, what is left for me? Of course, you say to the buyer: so
so, let me go to the little kids - although what kind of little kids I have there - not the kids who are already alive, but grandfathers. You will let me go, and I will serve you, just say "at the command of the pike,
according to my wish." Well, they let go. Some out of fear, others out of kindness, and some out of greed ... You swim in the river, you swim - it’s cold, rheumatism, you climb back into the well, and
the old woman with the tub is right there again ... - The pike hid in the water, gurgled and leaned out again. - Well
what are you going to ask, soldier? Only something simpler, otherwise they ask for some kind of TVs, transistors ... One was completely stunned: “Fulfill, he says, for me the annual plan at the sawmill.” My years are not
those - sawing firewood ...
“Yeah,” I said. - And you, then, still can TV?
“No,” the pike honestly admitted. I can't TV. And this ... combine with a player can’t either. I don't believe in them. You are something faster. Boots, let's say, runners or a cap of invisibility ... Huh?
The hope that arose in me to get away today from the Moskvich grease went out.
“Don't worry,” I said. - I don't need anything. I will let you go now.
“Good,” the pike said calmly. – I love such people. Just now, too ... Bought me for
some kind of market, I promised him the royal daughter. I'm floating on the river, I'm ashamed, of course, I have nowhere to put my eyes. Well, I went blind and entered the net. Tashshat. Again, I think I'll have to lie. And what does he do? He got me
enough across the teeth, so that the mouth does not open. Well, I think it's over, they'll cook it. An no. He pinches me
something fin and throws back into the river. In! - The pike leaned out of the tub and put out its fin,
grasped at the base with a metal clip. On the clip I read: "Launched this instance in
Nightingale River 1854. Deliver to E.I.V. Academy of Sciences, St. Petersburg. “Don’t tell the old woman,” the pike warned. - It will tear off with a fin. She is greedy, mean.
"What should I ask her?" I thought frantically.
How do you do your miracles?
– What are these miracles?
- Well ... the fulfillment of desires ...
- Oh, is this? How I do it… Trained from childhood, so I do it. How do I know how I do it ... Goldfish did it even better, but all the same died. You can't escape fate.
It seemed to me that the pike sighed.
- From old age? I asked.
– What there from old age! She was young, strong ... They threw a depth bomb at her, a serviceman. And they let her belly up, and some kind of underwater ship happened nearby, also sank. She
I would have paid off, but they didn’t ask her, they saw her and immediately with a bomb ... That's how it happens. - She
paused. "So are you letting me go or what?" Something stuffy, there will be a thunderstorm ...
“Of course, of course,” I said, startled. - How about you - to leave or in a tub? ..
- Drop it, soldier, drop it.
I carefully put my hands into the tub and took out the pike - there were eight kilograms in it. Pike
muttered: “Well, if there is a self-assembled tablecloth or, say, a flying carpet, then I will be here ... For
I won’t be lost…” “Goodbye,” I said and unclenched my hands. There was a noisy splash.
For some time I stood looking at my palms, stained with greenery. I had some
strange feeling. From time to time, like a gust of wind, the consciousness came that I was sitting in the room on the sofa, but as soon as I shook my head, I again found myself at the well. Then it passed. I washed my face with excellent ice water, filled the radiator and shaved. The old woman did not show up. I wanted to eat, and I need to
I had to go to the city to the post office, where the guys were already waiting for me. I locked the car and got out
gates.
I walked leisurely along Lukomorye Street, thrusting my hands into the pockets of my gray GDR jacket.
and looking down at your feet. In the back pocket of my favorite jeans, streaked with "lightning", the old woman's coppers jingled. I was wondering. The skinny pamphlets of the Knowledge Society taught me to think that animals are not capable of talking. Fairy tales from childhood convinced me otherwise. I agree
I was, of course, with pamphlets, because I had never seen talking animals in my life. Even parrots. I used to know a parrot that could roar like a tiger, but he couldn't do it like a human. And so
now - a pike, a cat Vasily and even a mirror. However, inanimate objects just talk often. And, by the way, this consideration would never have occurred to, say, my great-grandfather. From his great-grandfather's point of view, a talking cat is a far less fantastic thing than a polished wooden box that wheezes, howls, plays music and speaks many languages. With a cat
is also more or less clear. But how does a pike talk? Pike don't have lungs. It's right. True, at
it should be a swim bladder, the function of which, as I know, is not yet completely clear to ichthyologists. My acquaintance ichthyologist Zhenya Skoromakhov even believes that this function is completely unclear, and when I try to argue with arguments from the brochures of the Knowledge Society, Zhenya
growls and spits. It completely loses its inherent gift of human speech ... I have the impression that we still know very little about the capabilities of animals. Only recently it became clear
that fish and marine animals exchange signals underwater. Very interesting write about dolphins. Or, say, the monkey Raphael. I saw it myself. It is true that she does not know how to talk, but
she developed a reflex: green light - banana, red light - electric shock. And everything was fine until they turned on the red and green lights at the same time. Then Raphael behaved
just like Zhenya, for example. He was terribly offended. He rushed to the window where the experimenter was sitting, and began, screeching and growling, spitting into this window. And in general there is an anecdote - one
the monkey says to the other, “Do you know what a conditioned reflex is? That's when the bell rings and all those
quasi-monkeys in white coats will run to us with bananas and sweets.” Of course, all this is extremely difficult. The terminology has not been developed. When in these conditions you try to solve problems,
associated with the psyche and potentialities of animals, you feel completely
powerless. But, on the other hand, when you are given, say, the same system of integral equations
like stellar statistics with unknown functions under the integral, then the state of health is not better. A
so the main thing is to think. Like Pascal: “Let us learn to think well - this is the basic principle
morality."
I went out to Mira Avenue and stopped, attracted by an unusual sight. On the pavement
there was a man with children's flags in his hands. Behind him, ten paces away, with a strained roar, slowly crawled
a large white MAZ with a giant smoking trailer in the form of a silver tank. The word “flammable” was written on the tank, to the right and left of it, red fire engines, bristling with fire extinguishers, rolled just as slowly. From time to time, the smooth roar of the engine intervened
some new sound that unpleasantly chilled the heart, and then yellow
tongues of flame. The faces of the firefighters under their hooded helmets were courageous and stern. Around
the cavalcades rushed about in a cloud of children. They shrieked piercingly: “Tilili-tilili, and the dragon was taken!” Adult passers-by cautiously pressed against the fences. A clear desire was written on their faces to protect their clothes from possible damage.“They’ve brought a dear one,” said a familiar creaky bass over my ear.
I turned around. Behind stood Naina Kievna, dismayed, with a purse filled with blue
bags of sugar.
“Go ahead,” she repeated. - Every Friday they carry ...
- Where? I asked.
- To the landfill, father. Everyone is experimenting... There is nothing else for them to do.
- And who was taken, Naina Kievna?
- That is, how is it - whom? You don't see it yourself, do you?
She turned and walked away, but I caught up with her.
- Naina Kievna, you have received a telephone message here.
- Who is it from?
“From Ha Em Wii.
– And about what?
“You have some kind of meeting today,” I said, looking at her intently. - On Bald Mountain. Form
clothes - front.
The old woman was clearly delighted.
– Really? - she said. - That's good, then! .. And where is the telephone message?
- In the hallway on the phone.
Does it say anything about membership dues? she asked, lowering her voice.
- In what sense?
- Well, what, they say, it is necessary to pay off the debt with one thousand seven hundred ... - She fell silent.
“No,” I said. - Nothing like that was said.
- Well, good. And what about transport? Will they deliver a car or what?
“Let me bring you a purse,” I suggested.
The old woman recoiled.
- Why are you doing this? she asked suspiciously. - You leave it - I don’t like ... His wallet! ..
Young, yes, apparently, from the early ones ...
I don't like old women, I thought.
So what about transportation? she repeated.
“At my own expense,” I said gloomily.
- Ah, hoarders! groaned the old woman. - The broom was taken to the museum, the stupa is not being repaired, contributions
they tear up five rubles for banknotes, and to Lysaya Gora at their own expense! The account is not small, father, yes
while the taxi is waiting...
Muttering and coughing, she turned away from me and walked away. I rubbed my hands and also went mine
Expensive. My assumptions were justified. The knot of astonishing events tightened ever tighter. And I'm ashamed to admit it, but it seemed to me now more interesting than even modeling
reflex arc.
Prospekt Mira was already empty. At the crossroads, a flock of children was spinning - they were playing, in my opinion, siskin. When they saw me, they abandoned the game and began to approach. Anticipating something bad, I hurriedly passed them and moved towards the center. Behind me there was a strangled enthusiastic exclamation: "Dandy!" I quickened my pace. "Dandy!" several voices yelled at once. I almost ran.
Behind them squealed: “Style-yeah! Thin-legged! Papa’s “Victory”!..” Passers-by looked at me sympathetically. In such situations, it is best to dive somewhere. I dived into the nearest store, which turned out to be a grocery store, walked along the counters, made sure that there was sugar, a selection of sausages and
sweets is not rich, but the choice of so-called fish products exceeds all expectations. There was such salmon and such salmon! .. I drank a glass of sparkling water and looked out into the street. Boys
did not have. Then I left the store and moved on. Soon sheds and log huts-redoubts
ran out, went modern two-story houses with open gardens. Babies were scurrying about in the squares, elderly women were knitting something warm, and elderly men were playing dominoes.
In the center of the city was a vast square, surrounded by two - and three-story buildings.
The area was paved, in the middle there was a green garden. Above the greenery rose a large red shield with the inscription "Honor Board" and several smaller shields with diagrams and diagrams. I found the post office here, on the square. We agreed with the guys that the first one to arrive at
city, will leave a note on demand with their coordinates. There was no note and I left
a letter in which he gave his address and explained how to get to the hut on curnogi. Then I decided
have breakfast.
Walking around the square, I found: a cinema where "Kozara" was on; bookstore closed for
rediscount; City Council, in front of which stood several thoroughly dusted "gaziks"; the hotel "Cold Sea" - as usual, without vacancies; two kiosks with soda water and ice cream; shop (manufactured goods) No. 2 and shop (household goods) No. 18; canteen №11, opening from
twelve o'clock, and buffet number 3, closed without explanation. Then I found the city branch
police, near the open doors of which I talked with a very young policeman with the rank of sergeant, who explained to me where the gas station was and what the road to Lezhnev was. "Where is your car?" the policeman inquired, looking around the square. “From acquaintances,” I replied. "Oh, my friends..."
- said the policeman significantly. I think he took note of me. I bowed timidly.
Next to the three-story building of Solrybsnabprompotrebsoyuz FCU, I finally found a small tidy tea house No. 16/27. The tearoom was good. There were not very many people, they really drank tea and talked about understandable things: that, finally, a bridge had collapsed under Korobets and
now you have to wade; that the traffic police post had already been removed from the fifteenth kilometer for a week; What
“a spark is a beast, it will kill an elephant, but it doesn’t catch a shish ...” There was a smell of gasoline and fried fish. Not busy
people who were talking were staring at my jeans, and I was glad that I had
the place is a professional stain - the day before yesterday I very successfully sat down on a syringe with grease.
I took a full plate of fried fish, three glasses of tea and three sandwiches with balyk, paid off with a bunch of old woman's coppers ("I was standing on the porch ..." - the barmaid grumbled), settled in
secluded corner and began to eat, with pleasure watching these hoarse-voiced, smoky people. It was nice to see how tanned, independent, wiry they were, who had seen everything, how they eat with appetite, smoke with appetite, talk with appetite. They used the respite to the last drop before long hours of shaking boring road, hot stuffiness
cabins, dust and sun. If I hadn’t been a programmer, I would definitely have become a driver and I would have worked not on a shabby car, and not even on a bus, but on some kind of cargo monster, so that I had to climb a ladder into the cab, and change the wheel with the help of small crane.
At the next table sat two young men who did not look like chauffeurs, and therefore at first I did not pay attention to them. The same, however, as they did to me. But when I was finishing my second glass of tea, the word “sofa” flew up to me. Then one of them said: “... And then it is not clear why it exists at all, this Iznakurnizh ...” - and I began to listen. Unfortunately they said
quietly, and I was sitting with my back to them, so it was hard to hear. But the voices seemed familiar to me: "... no theses ... only a sofa ...", "... so hairy? ..", "... a sofa ... the sixteenth
degree…”, “…with transgression only fourteen orders…”, “…it is easier to model the translator…”, “…you never know who giggles!..”, “…I’ll give you a razor…”, “…we can’t live without a sofa…”. Here alone
of them suffocated, so familiar that I immediately remembered tonight and turned around, but they were already
walked to the exit - two hefty guys with steep shoulders and athletic nape. Some
while I still saw them through the window, they crossed the square, went around the garden and disappeared behind the diagrams. I
I finished my tea, finished my sandwiches and went out too. Their sofa, you see, worries me, I thought. Mermaid don't have them
worries. The talking cat does not interest them. And without a sofa, you see, they cannot ... I tried
remember what kind of sofa I have there, but I couldn’t remember anything special. A sofa is like a sofa.
Good sofa. Comfortable. Only a strange reality is dreaming on him.
Now it would be nice to go home and take care of all these couch affairs closely.
Experiment with a flip book, talk frankly with the cat Vasily and see if there is anything else interesting in the hut on chicken legs. But at home, my Moskvich was waiting for me and the need to do both EU and MOT. It was still possible to reconcile with EU, this is just Daily Care, all sorts of shaking out rugs and washing the body with a jet of water under pressure, which washing, however, can be replaced if necessary by watering from a garden watering can or bucket. But here is THAT… On a hot day, a clean person is afraid to think about THAT. Because TO
is nothing but Maintenance, and maintenance is what I
I lie under the car with an oil syringe in my hands and gradually transfer the contents of the syringe
both in cap oilers, and on his physiognomy. It is hot and stuffy under the car, and the bottom
it, covered with a thick layer of dried mud ... In short, I did not really want to go home.Chapter Four
Who allowed himself this devilish joke? Grab him and unmask him so we know
whom shall we hang on the fortress wall in the morning!
E. A. PoI bought the day before yesterday's Pravda, drank sparkling water and sat down on a bench in the garden,
in the shadow of the Hall of Fame. It was eleven o'clock. I carefully looked through the newspaper. It took seven
minutes. Then I read an article about hydroponics, a feuilleton about thieves from Kansk, and a long letter from the workers of a chemical plant to the editor. It only took twenty-two minutes. Shouldn't you go
to the movies, I thought. But I have already seen Kozara - once in the cinema and once on TV. Then I decided to have a drink of water, folded the newspaper and got up. Of all the old woman's copper in my pocket, I only have
one nickel. Drink up, I decided, drank water with syrup, got a penny of change and bought it in a nearby
a stall of boxes of matches. There was absolutely nothing else for me to do in the city center. And I went where
eyes look - into a narrow street between store No. 2 and dining room No. 11.
There were almost no passers-by on the street. I was overtaken by a large dusty truck with a rumbling
trailer. The driver, poking his elbow and head out the window, looked wearily at the cobblestone pavement. Street,
descending, it turned sharply to the right, at the turn next to the pavement the barrel of an old cast-iron cannon stuck out of the ground, its muzzle was clogged with earth and cigarette butts. Soon the street ended in a cliff
river. I sat on the edge of the cliff and admired the scenery, then crossed to the other side and wandered back.
I wonder where that truck went? I suddenly thought. There was no drop off. I began to look around, looking for the gate on the sides of the street, and then I found a small, but very strange house,
squeezed between two gloomy brick sheds. The windows of the lower floor of his were taken away
iron rods and half covered with chalk. There were no doors in the house at all. I noticed
this is immediately because the sign, which is usually placed next to the gate or next to the entrance,
hung right here between two windows. The sign read: "AN USSR NIICHAVO". I
went to the middle of the street: yes, two floors with ten windows and not a single door. And on the right and left, close, storehouses. NICHAVO, I thought. Research Institute… FAQ? I mean what?
Extremely Automated Armed Guards? Black Associations of Eastern Oceania?
The hut on kurnogs, I thought, is a museum of this very NIICHAVO. My fellow travelers are probably from here too. And those in the tearoom, too... A flock of crows rose from the roof of the building
street. I turned and walked back to the square.
We are all naive materialists, I thought. And we are all rationalists. We want everything to be
immediately explained rationalistically, that is, reduced to a handful of already known facts. And neither
none of us has a penny of dialectics. It never occurs to anyone that between the known facts
and some new phenomenon may lie the sea of ​​the unknown, and then we declare a new phenomenon
supernatural and therefore impossible. For example, how would the master Montesquieu take
message about reviving a dead person forty-five minutes after the recorded stop
hearts? I would probably take it with hostility. So to speak, in baguettes. I would call it obscurantism and
priesthood. If only he hadn't dismissed such a message at all. And if that happened to him
his eyes, he would be in an unusually difficult position. As I am now, only I'm more used to it. And he would either have to consider this resurrection a scam, or renounce his own
sensations, or even renounce materialism. Most likely, he would consider the resurrection a scam. But for the rest of his life, the memory of this clever trick would have irritated his thought, like
mote in the eye ... But we are children of another century. We have seen everything: a live dog's head sewn to the back of another live dog; and an artificial kidney the size of a closet; and dead iron
a hand controlled by living nerves; and people who may casually remark: “It was already
after I died for the first time ... "Yes, in our time, Montesquieu would not have many chances
stay materialistic. And here we are, and nothing! True, sometimes it is difficult - when a random wind suddenly brings to us across the ocean of the unknown strange petals from the boundless continents of the unknown. And this happens especially often when you find something that you are not looking for. Soon amazing animals will appear in zoological museums, the first animals from Mars or Venus. Yes,
of course, we will stare at them and slap our thighs, but we have been waiting for these animals for a long time, we are well prepared for their appearance. We would be much more amazed and disappointed if these animals did not appear or if they turned out to be similar to our cats and dogs.
As a rule, the science in which we believe (and often blindly) prepares us in advance and for a long time for future miracles, and we only get psychological shock when we are faced with the unpredictable - some kind of hole in the fourth dimension, or biological radio communication, or a living planet ... Or, say, a hut on chicken legs ... But hook-nosed Roman was right: here they have
very, very, very interesting...
I went out into the square and stopped in front of a soda kiosk. I remembered exactly what
I don’t have change, and I knew that I would have to exchange a piece of paper, and I was already preparing an ingratiating smile,
because soda vendors hate to change paper money, when all of a sudden
I found a nickel in my jeans pocket. I was surprised and delighted, but overjoyed. I drank
sparkling water with syrup, received a wet change and talked to the saleswoman about the weather.
Then I resolutely headed home in order to quickly finish with the EU and TO and engage in rational dialectical explanations. I put the kopeck in my pocket and stopped, discovering that in the same
there is one more penny in the pocket. I took it out and examined it. The nickel was slightly damp, it had
"5 kopecks 1961" was written, and the number "6" was hushed up with a shallow dent. Maybe I even
then I would not have paid attention to this small incident, if not for that very instant
a feeling already familiar to me - as if I was simultaneously standing on Prospekt Mira and sitting on the couch,
stupidly looking at the hanger. And just like before, when I shook my head, the feeling disappeared.
For some time I walked slowly, absently tossing and catching a nickel (it fell on the palm of my hand).
all the time "tails"), and tried to concentrate. Then I saw the grocery store where I had escaped from the boys in the morning, and I went in there. Holding the nickel between two fingers, I went straight to the counter, where
sold juices and water, and without any pleasure drank a glass without syrup. Then, holding the change in
fist, I stepped aside and checked the pocket.
It was the very case when psychological shock does not occur. I'd rather be surprised
if there was no nickel in the pocket. But he was there - wet, 1961, with a chipped
number "6". I was pushed and asked if I was awake. Turns out I was standing in line at the checkout. I
said I was awake and knocked out a check for three boxes of matches. Standing in line for matches, I found
that the nickel is in the pocket. I was completely calm. After receiving three boxes, I left the store, returned to the square and began to experiment.
The experiment took me about an hour. During this hour I walked around the square ten times, swollen
from water, matchboxes and newspapers, got acquainted with all the sellers and saleswomen and came to a number of interesting conclusions. The nickel comes back if they get paid. If you just throw it, drop it, lose it, it will remain where it fell. The penny is returned to the pocket at the moment when the change
passes from the hands of the seller to the hands of the buyer. If at the same time keep your hand in one pocket, a nickel
appears in another. In a pocket fastened with a zipper, it never appears. If you keep
hands in both pockets and accept change with your elbow, then a nickel can appear anywhere on the body (in
in my case, it was found in a shoe). The disappearance of a nickel from a plate with copper on the counter cannot be noticed: among other copper, the nickel is immediately lost, and there is no movement in the plate in
there is no moment when the penny goes into the pocket.
So, we were dealing with the so-called fiat penny in the process of its functioning. By itself, the fact of immutability did not interest me very much. My imagination was first of all shocked by the possibility of extra-spatial movement of a material body. I was
it is quite clear that the mysterious transfer of a nickel from the seller to the buyer is not
nothing more than a special case of the notorious null-transportation, well-known to science fiction fans also under pseudonyms: hypertransition, regular jump, Tarantoga phenomenon… The opening prospects were dazzling.
I didn't have any appliances. An ordinary laboratory minimum thermometer could
I would give a lot, but I didn't even have it. I was forced to limit myself to purely visual subjective observations. I began my last circle around the square by placing in front of me
the following task: “Putting a nickel next to a plate for change and, if possible, preventing
the seller to mix it with the rest of the money before handing over the change, visually trace the process of moving a nickel in space, while at the same time trying to at least qualitatively determine the change in air temperature near the proposed transition trajectory. However, the experiment was
interrupted at the beginning.
When I approached the saleswoman Manya, the same young policeman was already waiting for me in
rank of sergeant.
“Yes,” he said in a professional voice.
I looked at him searchingly, foreboding something bad.
“I’ll ask for documents, citizen,” said the policeman, saluting and looking past me.
- What's the matter? I asked, taking out my passport.
“And I’ll ask for a nickel,” said the policeman, accepting the passport.
I silently gave him a penny. Mania looked at me with angry eyes. The policeman looked at the nickel and, uttering with satisfaction: "Aha ...", opened the passport. He studied the passport like a bibliophile
studies a rare incunabula. I patiently waited. The crowd slowly grew around. The crowd expressed different opinions about me.
“We’ll have to go through,” the policeman said at last.
We passed. While we were passing, several options were created in the crowd of escorts
my difficult biography, and a number of reasons were formulated that caused the beginning of
eyes of consequence.
In the department, the sergeant handed over a nickel and a passport to the lieutenant on duty. He examined the penny and
invited me to sit down. I sat down. The lieutenant casually said: "Hand over the change," and also delved into
study of the passport. I took the coppers out of my pocket. “Recalculate, Kovalyov,” the lieutenant said and, putting down his passport, began to look into my eyes.
- Did you buy a lot? - he asked.
“A lot,” I replied.
"Give it up too," said the lieutenant.
I laid out on the table in front of him four issues of the day before yesterday's Pravda, three issues of the local newspaper Rybak, two issues of the Literaturnaya Gazeta, eight boxes of matches, six pieces of Golden Key toffee, and a discounted brush for cleaning the stove.
“I can’t hand over the water,” I said dryly. “Five glasses with syrup and four without syrup.
I began to understand what was the matter, and I was extremely embarrassed and dreary at the thought that
will have to justify.
“Seventy-four kopecks, Comrade Lieutenant,” young Kovalev reported.
The lieutenant contemplated thoughtfully a pile of newspapers and matchboxes.
Did you have fun or what? he asked me.
“Or something,” I said grimly.
"Not careful," said the lieutenant. “Not careful, citizen. Tell me.
I told. At the end of the story, I convincingly asked the lieutenant not to consider my actions as an attempt to save money for the Zaporozhets. My ears were on fire. The lieutenant chuckled.
- Why not consider it? he inquired. - There were cases when they accumulated.
I shrugged.
- I assure you, such a thought could not have occurred to me ... That is, what I say - could not
She really didn't come!
The lieutenant was silent for a long time. Young Kovalev took my passport and began to examine it again.
“It’s even somehow strange to assume ...” I said, bewildered. - Absolutely crazy idea ...
Save a penny ... - I shrugged again. - Then it’s better, as they say, to stand on the porch ...
“We are fighting begging,” the lieutenant said significantly.
- Well, right, well, naturally ... I just don’t understand what I have to do with it, and ... - I caught myself on
that I shrug my shoulders a lot, and I promised myself not to do this again.
The lieutenant was silent again for an exhaustingly long time, looking at the nickel.
“We’ll have to draw up a protocol,” he said at last.
I shrugged.
- Please, of course ... although ... - I did not know what, in fact, "although."
For some time the lieutenant looked at me, waiting for the continuation. But I was just thinking
which article of the criminal code suits my actions, and then he pulled a sheet of paper towards him and
began to write.
Young Kovalev returned to his post. The lieutenant squeaked his pen and often dipped it in
inkwell. I sat idly staring at the posters hanging on the walls, idly thinking about
that in my place Lomonosov, say, would have grabbed his passport and jumped out the window. What, in fact,
essence? I thought. The bottom line is that a person does not consider himself guilty. In this sense, I am not guilty. But guilt seems to be objective and subjective. And the fact remains that all this
copper in the amount of seventy-four kopecks is legally the result of theft, carried out with the help of technical means, which is the fiat nickel ...
“Read and sign,” said the lieutenant.
I've read. From the protocol it was clear that I, the undersigned Privalov A. I., unknown
he came into possession of a working model of an unchangeable penny sample GOST 71862 and abused it; that I, the undersigned Privalov A.I., affirm that my actions
produced for the purpose of a scientific experiment without any selfish intentions; that I am ready to compensate the losses caused to the state in the amount of one ruble fifty-five kopecks; that, finally, in accordance with the decision of the Solovetsky City Council of March 22, 1959, I handed over the indicated current model of the unchangeable nickel to the officer on duty in the department, Lieutenant Sergienko
U. U. and received in return five kopecks in coins that circulate on the territory of the Soviet Union. I signed up.
The lieutenant checked my signature with the signature in the passport, again carefully counted the coppers,
called somewhere in order to clarify the cost of toffees and a primus brush, wrote out a receipt and
gave it to me along with five kopecks in circulating coinage. Returning the newspapers
matches, sweets and a brush, he said:
- And you, by your own admission, drank the water. Total from you eighty-one kopecks.
With enormous relief, I paid. The lieutenant, after carefully scrolling through again, returned
me a passport.
“You can go, citizen Privalov,” he said. “And continue to be more careful. You are in for a long time
Solovets?
“I'm leaving tomorrow,” I said.
Until tomorrow, be careful.
“Oh, I’ll try,” I said, hiding my passport. Then, obeying an impulse, he asked, lowering his voice: “Tell me, Comrade Lieutenant, is it not strange for you here in Solovets?”
The lieutenant was already looking at some papers.
“I've been here a long time,” he said absently. - I'm used to it.Chapter Five
“Do you yourself believe in ghosts?” one of the listeners asked the lecturer.
“Of course not,” the lecturer replied, and slowly vanished into thin air.
True storyUntil the evening I tried to be very careful. Straight from the office I went home
on Lukomorye and there immediately climbed under the car. It was really hot. Thunderstorm slowly crept from the west
nay black cloud. While I was lying under the car and dousing myself with oil, the old woman Naina Kievna, who had become
suddenly very affectionate and amiable, she drove up to me twice so that I would take her to Lysaya Gora.
“They say, father, it’s harmful for a car to stand,” she cooed raspily, looking under the front bumper. They say it's good for her to drive. And I would have paid, do not hesitate ... "I have to go to Bald Mountain
did not want. Firstly, the guys could arrive at any minute. Secondly, the old woman in her cooing modification was even more unpleasant to me than in her grumpy one. Further, as it turned out, it was ninety miles one way to Lysa Gora, and when I asked my grandmother about the quality of the road, she
joyfully declared that I should not worry - the road is smooth, and in which case she, the grandmother, will be herself
push the car out. (“Don’t look, father, that I’m old, I’m still very strong.”) After
the first unsuccessful attack, the old woman temporarily retreated and went into the hut. Then the cat Vasily came under my car. For a minute he carefully watched my hands, and then said in an undertone,
but clearly: “I don’t advise, citizen ... me-eh ... I don’t advise. They’ll eat it, ”and then immediately left,
wagging his tail. I wanted to be very careful, and therefore, when the grandmother went for the second time
on the attack, I, in order to end everything at once, asked her for fifty rubles. She immediately backed off.
looking at me with respect.
I did the EU and MOT, went to the gas station with the greatest care, had lunch
in dining room No. 11 and was once again subjected to a document check by the vigilant Kovalev. For
clearing my conscience, I asked him what the road was to Lysa Gora. The young sergeant looked at me with
with great disbelief and said: “The road? What are you talking about, citizen? What is the road there? No
there is no road." I returned home in the pouring rain.
The old woman left. Vasily the cat has disappeared. In the well someone sang in two voices, and it was eerie and
sadly. Soon the downpour was replaced by a dull fine rain. It became dark.
I climbed into my room and tried to experiment with a flip book. However, in
something was holding her back. Maybe I did something wrong or the weather influenced, but it was as it was,
so it remained “Practical exercises in syntax and punctuation” by F. F. Kuzmin, how much I
did not dare. It was absolutely impossible to read such a book, and I tried my luck with a mirror.
But the mirror reflected anything, and was silent. Then I lay down on the sofa and began to lie down.
From boredom and the sound of rain, I was already starting to doze off when the phone suddenly rang. I went out to
hallway and picked up the phone.
- Hello...
The tube was silent and crackling.
“Hello,” I said, and blew into the phone. – Press the button.
There was no answer.
“Knock on the phone,” I advised. The tube was silent. I blew again, pulled the cord and
said: - Call back from another machine.
Then in the tube they rudely inquired:
Is this Alexander?
- Yes. - I was surprised.
Why don't you answer?
- I answer. Who is this?
“It’s Petrovsky that worries you. Go to the pickling shop and tell the foreman to give me a call.
- Which master?
“Well, who do you have there today?”
- Don't know…
What do you mean I don't know? Is this Alexander?
“Listen, citizen,” I said. - What number are you calling?
- According to the seventy-second ... Is this the seventy-second?
I did not know.
“Apparently not,” I said.
- Why do you say that you are Alexander?
“I really am Alexander!
- Ugh! .. Is this a plant?
“No,” I said. - This is museum.
“Ah… Then I apologize. Masters, so you can not call ...
I hung up. For a while I stood looking around the hallway. There were five doors in the hallway: to my room, to the yard, to my grandmother's room, to the toilet, and another one, upholstered in iron, with a huge
padlock. Boring, I thought. Alone. And the light bulb is dim, dusty... Dragging my feet, I returned to my room and stopped on the threshold.
There was no sofa.
Everything else was completely the same: the table, and the stove, and the mirror, and the hanger, and the stool.
And the book lay on the windowsill exactly where I had left it. And on the floor, where there used to be a sofa, there was only a very dusty, littered rectangle. Then I saw the bed linen neatly folded under the hanger.
“There was a sofa here just now,” I said aloud. - I lay on it.
Something has changed in the house. The room was filled with an indistinct noise. Someone was talking
music was heard, somewhere they laughed, coughed, shuffled their feet. A vague shadow blocked the light of the bulb for a moment, and the floorboards creaked loudly. Then suddenly there was a smell of a pharmacy, and it smelled in my face
cold. I backed off. And immediately someone knocked sharply and distinctly on the outer door. Noises
subsided instantly. Looking back at the place where the sofa used to be, I went out into the hall again and opened
door.
In front of me in the fine rain stood a short, graceful man in a short cream
a cloak of perfect cleanliness with a raised collar. He took off his hat and said with dignity:
- I beg your pardon, Alexander Ivanovich. Could you give me five minutes to talk?
“Of course,” I said, confused. - Come in...
I saw this man for the first time in my life, and the thought flashed through my mind whether he was connected with the local
militia. The stranger stepped into the hallway and made a motion to go straight into my room. I got in his way. I don’t know why I did it - probably because I didn’t want to ask questions
about dust and debris on the floor.
“Excuse me,” I murmured, “maybe here? .. Otherwise, I have a mess. And nowhere to sit...
The stranger shook his head sharply.
- How - nowhere? he said softly. - And the sofa?
For a minute we silently looked into each other's eyes.
- Mmmm ... What is a sofa? I asked in a whisper for some reason.
The stranger lowered his eyelids.
- Oh, how is it? he said slowly. - Understand. It's a pity. Well, sorry...
He nodded politely, put on his hat, and walked resolutely to the toilet door.
- Where are you going? I shouted. – You not there!
The stranger, without turning around, muttered: “Ah, it doesn’t matter,” and disappeared through the door. I
mechanically turned on the light for him, stood a little, listening, then tore open the door. Nobody in the toilet
did not have. I carefully pulled out a cigarette and lit it. Sofa, I thought. What's with the sofa? Never
I haven't heard any stories about sofas. There was a flying carpet. There was a self-assembly tablecloth. There were: a cap of invisibility, walking boots, gusli-samogudy. There was a miracle mirror. And there was no miracle sofa. They sit or lie on sofas, a sofa is something durable, very ordinary ... Indeed, what fantasy could be inspired by a sofa? ..
When I returned to the room, I immediately saw the Little Man. He sat on the stove under the ceiling, crouched in a very uncomfortable position. He had a wrinkled, unshaven face and gray hairy ears.
“Hi,” I said wearily.
The Little Man twisted his long lips in pain.
“Good evening,” he said. - Excuse me, please, brought me here - I don’t understand myself
how... I'm talking about the sofa.
“You are late about the sofa,” I said, sitting down at the table.
“I see,” the Little Man said softly and shifted awkwardly. The lime fell.
I smoked, looking at him thoughtfully. The Little Man peered down uncertainly.
- Can I help you? I asked, making a move.
“No thanks,” said the Little Man despondently. - I'm better on my own...
Dirty in chalk, he crept to the edge of the couch and, awkwardly pushing off, dived headlong into
down. I sank inside, but he hung in the air and began to slowly descend, convulsively melting-
riv arms and legs. It wasn't very aesthetic, but it was fun. Landing on all fours, he now
he got up and wiped his wet face with his sleeve.
“He’s become quite an old man,” he said hoarsely. - About a hundred years ago or, say, under Gonzasta for such
descent would have deprived me of my diploma, be sure, Alexander Ivanovich.
- What did you finish? I inquired, lighting a second cigarette.
He didn't listen to me. Sitting down on a stool opposite, he continued mournfully:
“I used to levitate like Zex. And now, excuse me, I can not remove the vegetation on my ears.
It's so messy... But what if there's no talent? A huge number of temptations around, all kinds
degrees, titles, laureate awards, but no talent! Many of us grow old. Korifeev
this, of course, does not apply. Gian Giacomo, Cristobal Junta, Giuseppe Balsamo, or, say, Comrade Fyodor Simeonovich Kivrin ... No traces of vegetation! He looked up triumphantly.
on me. - No-one! Smooth skin, elegance, slimness…
“Let me,” I said. - You said - Giuseppe Balsamo ... But this is the same as Count Cagliostro! And according to Tolstoy, the count was fat and very unpleasant in appearance ...
The Little Man looked at me with regret and smiled indulgently.
“You are simply not up to date, Alexander Ivanovich,” he said. - Count Cagliostro is quite
not the same as the great Balsamo. It's… how shall I put it… It's not a very successful copy of him.
Balsamo in his youth matrixed himself. He was extraordinarily, extraordinarily talented, but you know,
how it is done in youth ... Faster, funnier - blunder, and so it will do ... Yes, sir ... Never
say that Balsamo and Cagliostro are one and the same. It might get awkward.
I felt uncomfortable.
“Yes,” I said. - Of course, I'm not an expert. But ... Forgive me for the indiscreet question, but what does
is there a sofa? Who needed it?
The Little Man shuddered.
“Inexcusable arrogance,” he said loudly and stood up. I made a mistake and
ready to confess in all decisiveness. When such giants ... And then there are arrogant boys ... -
He began to bow, pressing his pale paws to his heart. - I beg your pardon, Alexander Ivanovich, I
disturbed you so much... Once again I strongly apologize and leave you immediately. - He approached
to the stove and looked up timidly. “Old me, Alexander Ivanovich,” he said, sighing heavily. - Old...
- Or maybe it would be more convenient for you ... through ... uh ... Then a comrade came in front of you,
so he took advantage.
- And-and, my friend, it was Cristobal Junta! What is he to seep through the sewers
a dozen leagues ... - The Little Man waved his hand mournfully. - We are simpler ... He takes the sofa with him
taken or transgressed?
“I-I don’t know,” I said. The thing is, he was too late.
The Little Man, dumbfounded, pinched the hair on his right ear.
- Late? He? Incredible ... However, how can we judge this? Goodbye,
Alexander Ivanovich, forgive me generously.
He pushed through the wall with visible effort and disappeared. I threw the cigarette butt into the garbage on the floor. Ah yes
sofa! This is not a talking cat. This is something more impressive - some kind of drama. Maybe even
drama of ideas. But, perhaps, more ... latecomers will come. Surely they will come. I looked at the trash.
Where did I see a broom?
Broom stood next to the tub under the telephone. I began to sweep up dust and debris, and suddenly something caught heavily on the broom and rolled out into the middle of the room. I looked. It was brilliant
an oblong cylinder the size of an index finger. I touched it with a broom. cylinder
swayed, something crackled dryly, and the room smelled of ozone. I dropped the broom and raised the top hat. He
It was smooth, well polished and warm to the touch. I flicked my fingernail at him, and he again
crackled. I turned it to inspect it from the end, and in the same second I felt that the floor was leaving
from under my feet. Everything turned upside down before my eyes. I hit something painfully with my heels, then with my shoulder and top of my head, dropped my top hat and fell. I was very shocked and did not immediately understand that
I lie in a narrow gap between the stove and the wall. The bulb above my head was swinging, and, looking up, I
I was surprised to find the ribbed footprints of my boots on the ceiling. Grunting, I climbed out of the gap and examined the soles. There was chalk on the soles.
“However,” I thought out loud. - Do not leak into the sewer! ..
I looked around for the cylinder. He stood, touching the floor with the edge of the end, in a position that excludes any possibility of balance. I cautiously approached and knelt beside him.
The cylinder crackled softly and swayed. I looked at him for a long time, stretching my neck, then blew on
him. The cylinder swayed more strongly, leaned over, and then a hoarse scream was heard behind my back and
smelled like wind. I looked around and sat down on the floor. A gigantic vulture neatly folded its wings on the stove
with a bare neck and a sinister curved beak.
“Hello,” I said. I was convinced that the vulture was talking.
The vulture, bowing his head, looked at me with one eye and immediately became like a chicken. I waved my hand in greeting. The vulture opened its beak, but did not speak. He raised his wing and
began to search under his arm, clicking his beak. The cylinder wobbled and rattled. The vulture stopped looking, pulled his head into his shoulders and covered his eyes with a yellow film. Trying not to turn around
back to him, I finished cleaning and threw the garbage into the rainy darkness outside the door. Then I returned to
room.
The vulture was asleep, it smelled of ozone. I looked at my watch: it was twenty past one. I stood a little over the cylinder, thinking about the law of conservation of energy, and at the same time of matter. Hardly
vultures condense from nothing. If this vulture originated here, in Solovets, then some kind of vulture
(not necessarily given) disappeared in the Caucasus or where they are found there. I estimated the transfer energy and
He looked warily at the cylinder. Better not touch it, I thought. It is better to cover it with something and let it stand. I brought a ladle from the hallway, carefully aimed and, without breathing, covered it with
cylinder. Then I sat down on a stool, lit a cigarette and waited for something else. The vulture snorted distinctly. IN
In the light of the lamp, his feathers shone with copper, huge claws dug into the lime. The smell of rot slowly spread from him.“You shouldn’t have done it, Alexander Ivanovich,” said a pleasant male voice.
- What exactly? I asked, looking at the mirror.
“I mean umklidet…
It wasn't the mirror that spoke. Someone else spoke.
“I don’t understand what you are talking about,” I said. There was no one in the room, and I felt annoyed.
“I’m talking about the umklidet,” said the voice. “You absolutely vainly covered him with an iron ladle. The Umklidet, or wand as you call it, requires extremely careful handling.
- That's why I covered ... Yes, you come in, comrade, otherwise it’s very uncomfortable to talk like that.
“Thank you,” said the voice.
Right in front of me slowly condensed a pale, very correct person in
perfectly fitting gray suit. Tilting his head somewhat to one side, he inquired with the most refined courtesy:
"I dare to hope I haven't troubled you too much?"
“Not at all,” I said, getting up. “Please sit down and make yourself at home. Would you like a seagull?
“Thank you,” said the stranger, and sat down across from me, tucking up his trousers in a graceful gesture. - As for tea, I beg your pardon, Alexander Ivanovich, I just had supper.
For some time he looked into my eyes with a secular smile. I smiled too.
- Are you talking about the sofa? - I said. Unfortunately no sofa. I'm sorry and I don't even
I know…
The stranger threw up his hands.
- What nonsense! - he said. - How much noise because of some, excuse me, nonsense, in which
besides, no one really believes ... Judge for yourself, Alexander Ivanovich, arrange squabbles,
ugly movie chases, disturbing people because of the mythical - I'm not afraid of this word - namely
mythical White Thesis… Every sober-minded person considers a sofa as a universal translator, somewhat bulky, but very solid and stable in work. And all the more ridiculous are the old ignoramuses talking about the White Thesis... No, I don't even want to talk about this couch.
“As you please,” I said, concentrating all my worldliness in this phrase. - Let's talk about something else.
“Superstition… Prejudice…” the stranger said absently. - Sloth of mind and envy,
envy, hairy envy…” He interrupted himself. - Excuse me, Alexander Ivanovich,
but I would still dare to ask your permission to remove this ladle. Unfortunately, iron
is practically opaque for the hyperfield, and the increase in the strength of the hyperfield in a small volume ...
I raised my hands.
- For God's sake, whatever you want! Remove the ladle ... Remove even this very ... mind ... mind ...
this magic wand ... - Here I stopped, to my astonishment to find that the ladle was no more.
The cylinder stood in a pool of liquid that looked like colored mercury. The liquid quickly evaporated.
“It will be better, I assure you,” said the stranger. “As for your generous
offer to remove the umklidet, I, unfortunately, cannot use it. This is already a matter of morality and ethics, a matter of honor, if you like... Conventions are so strong! I take the liberty of advising you
no more touching the umclidete. I see you hurt yourself, and this eagle... I think you feel...
uh… some amber…
“Yes,” I said with feeling. - It stinks bad. Like in a monkey house.
We looked at the eagle. The vulture, fluffed up, dozed off.
“The art of controlling the umklidet,” said the stranger, “is a complex and subtle art.
In no case should you be upset or reproach yourself. The umklidet management course takes eight semesters and requires a thorough knowledge of quantum alchemy. As a programmer you
probably, without much difficulty they would have mastered the umklidet of the electronic level, the so-called UEU-17 ...
But the quantum umklidet… hyperfields… transgressive incarnations… the generalized Lomonosov-Lavoisier law…” He spread his hands guiltily.
- What are you talking about! I said hastily. - I don’t pretend to ... Of course, I absolutely don’t
prepared.
Then I caught myself and offered him a cigarette.
“Thank you,” said the stranger. - I do not use, to my great regret.
Then, wiggling my fingers out of politeness, I inquired—I didn’t ask, I just inquired:
“Will I be allowed to know to what I owe the pleasantness of our meeting?”
The stranger lowered his eyes.
“I’m afraid to seem immodest,” he said, “but, alas, I must confess that I’ve had enough
I've been here for a long time. I don't want to name names, but I think even you, no matter how far you are
from all this, Alexander Ivanovich, it is clear that some unhealthy fuss has arisen around the sofa,
a scandal is brewing, the atmosphere is heating up, tension is growing. In such an environment, it is inevitable
mistakes, extremely undesirable accidents... We won't go far for examples. Someone -
I repeat, I would not like to name names, especially since this is an employee worthy of every
respect, and speaking of respect, I mean, if not manners, then great talent and self-sacrificing
ness, - and so, someone, hurrying and nervous, loses umklidet here, and umklidet becomes the center
spheres of events in which a person is involved, who is completely uninvolved in them ... -
He bowed in my direction. “And in such cases, it is absolutely necessary to have an impact that somehow neutralizes harmful influences ...” He looked significantly at the prints of boots on the ceiling. Then he smiled at me. “But I would not like to seem like an abstract altruist. Of course, all these
events are of great interest to me as a specialist and as an administrator ... However, I do not intend to
interfere with you any more, and since you have given me the confidence that you will no longer experiment with umklidet, I will ask your permission to take my leave.
He got up.
- Well, what are you! I cried. - Do not leave! I am so pleased to talk with you, I have a thousand questions for you! ..
- I highly appreciate your delicacy, Alexander Ivanovich, but you are tired, you need to rest ...
- Not at all! I objected hotly. - Vice versa!
“Alexander Ivanovich,” said the stranger, smiling affectionately and looking intently into my eyes. “But you are really tired. And you really want to relax.
And then I felt like I was really falling asleep. My eyes drooped. Talk no more
wanted. I didn't want anything more. I was terribly sleepy.
“It was an exceptional pleasure to meet you,” said the stranger in a low voice.
I saw how he began to turn pale, turn pale and slowly vanished into the air, leaving behind
a slight smell of expensive cologne. I somehow spread the mattress on the floor, poked my face into the pillow and
fell asleep instantly.
I was awakened by the flapping of wings and an unpleasant scream. There was a strange bluish twilight in the room. The eagle on the stove rustled, yelled vilely and beat its wings on the ceiling. I sat down and looked around.
In the middle of the room, a huge fellow in sweatpants and a striped shirt floated in the air.
loose Hawaiian. He hovered over the cylinder and, without touching it, smoothly waved his huge bony paws.
- What's the matter? I asked.
The kid glanced at me from under his shoulder and turned away.
“I don’t hear an answer,” I said angrily. I still really wanted to sleep.
“Quiet, you mortal,” the kid said hoarsely. He stopped his passes and took the cylinder with
gender. His voice sounded familiar to me.
- Hey buddy! I said threateningly. “Put that thing back and clear the room.
The kid was looking at me, jutting out his jaw. I pushed back the sheet and stood up.
“Come on, put down the umklidet!” I said out loud.
The kid sank to the floor and, firmly resting his feet, took a stance. The room became much
brighter, even though the bulb was not on.
“Baby,” said the kid, “you need to sleep at night. Better lie down.
The guy was clearly not a fool to fight. However, I do too.
- Shall we go outside? I suggested businesslike, pulling up my shorts.
Someone suddenly said with an expression:
– “Having directed your thoughts to the higher Self, free from lust and selfishness, healed from
mental fever, fight, Arjuna!
I started. The guy winced too.
- "Bhagavad Gita"! said the voice. - Canto 3, verse 30.
"It's a mirror," I said mechanically.
“I know it myself,” the kid grumbled.
“Put down the umklidet,” I demanded.
Why are you yelling like a sick elephant? – said the guy. - Is he yours?
- Or maybe yours?
- Yes, mine!
Here it dawned on me.
- So you dragged the sofa too?
"Don't mind your own business," the boy advised.
“Give me back the sofa,” I said. - He has a receipt.
- Go to hell! – said the kid, looking around.
And then two more people appeared in the room: a skinny one and a fat one, both in striped pajamas, similar to
prisoners of Sing Sing.
- Korneev! yelled the fat one. “So you’re stealing the sofa?! What a disgrace!
“Go on, all of you…” the kid said.
- You are a brute! the fat man shouted. - You must be chased! I'll file a report on you!
“Well, serve it,” said Korneev gloomily. - Do what you love.
"Don't you dare talk to me like that!" You are a boy! You are cheeky! you forgot here
umclidet! The young man could have been hurt!
"I've already been hurt," I intervened. - No sofa, sleep like a dog, every night talking ...
That smelly eagle...
The fat man immediately turned to me.
“An unheard-of breach of discipline,” he said. - You should complain ... And you should
be ashamed! He turned back to Korneev.
Korneev sullenly stuffed the umklidet into his cheek. The skinny man suddenly asked quietly and menacingly:
– Did you film the Thesis, Korneev?
The kid smiled grimly.
“There is no Thesis there,” he said. - What are you all up to? Don't want us to sofa
stole - give us another translator ...
- Have you read the order on non-withdrawal of items from the store? the skinny man inquired menacingly.
Korneev put his hands in his pockets and stared up at the ceiling.
– Do you know the decision of the Academic Council? the skinny one inquired.
“I know, Comrade Demin, that Monday begins on Saturday,” said Korneev sullenly.
“Don’t spread demagogy,” said the skinny one. - Immediately return the sofa and do not dare to come here
return more.
“I won’t return the sofa,” said Korneev. - We will finish the experiment - we will return it.
Tolstoy made an ugly scene. “Arbitrariness! ..” he squealed. – Hooliganism!..» Vulture
yelled excitedly again. Korneev, without taking his hands out of his pockets, turned his back and stepped
through the wall. The fat man rushed after him, shouting: “No, you will return the sofa!” Skinny told me:
- It's a misunderstanding. We will take steps to ensure it doesn't happen again.
He nodded and also moved towards the wall.
- Wait! I cried. - Orla! Take the eagle! Along with the scent!
Skinny, already halfway into the wall, turned around and beckoned the eagle with his finger. The vulture noisily fell off the stove and was pulled under his nail. Skinny disappeared. The blue light slowly faded, it became dark,
The rain beat against the window again. I turned on the light and looked around the room. Everything in the room was the same, only deep scratches from the claws of a vulture gaped on the stove, and wildly and ridiculously on the ceiling.
the ribbed footprints of my boots darkened.
“The clear oil in a cow,” the mirror said with idiotic profundity, “does not contribute to its nutrition, but it provides the best nutrition when processed in the proper way.
I turned off the light and lay down. The floor was hard and cold. I will have tomorrow from the old woman,
I thought.Chapter Six
“No,” he said in response to the persistent question of my eyes, “I am not a member of the club, I am a ghost.
“Okay, but that doesn’t give you the right to walk around the club.
H. J. WellsIn the morning it turned out that the sofa was in place. I wasn't surprised. I just thought that somehow
the old woman has achieved her goal: the sofa is in one corner, and I am lying in the other. As I made my bed and did my exercises, I thought that there was probably some limit to the capacity for surprise.
Apparently, I have stepped far beyond this limit. I even experienced some fatigue. I have tried
imagine something that could amaze me now, but I don’t have enough imagination
lo. I really didn't like that, because I can't stand people who can't be surprised.
True, I was far from the psychology of "think of it," rather, my state resembled the state of Alice in Wonderland: I was like in a dream and accepted and was ready to accept any miracle for
due, requiring a more detailed reaction than simple gaping of the mouth and blinking of the eyes.
I was still exercising when a door slammed in the hallway, heels shuffled and clattered, someone
coughed, something rattled and fell, and an authoritative voice called: "Comrade Gorynych!" Old woman
did not respond, and in the hallway they began to talk: “What kind of door is this? .. Ah, I understand. And this? - "Here
entrance to the museum. - “And here? .. What is it - everything is locked, locks ...” - “A very economic woman, Janus
Poluektovich. And this is a phone." “Where is the famous sofa? In the museum?" - "No. There should be
reserve."
"It's here," said a familiar sullen voice.
The door of my room swung open, and a tall, thin old man with magnificent snow-white gray hair, black-browed and black mustache, with deep black eyes, appeared on the threshold. Seeing
me (I was standing in my shorts, arms to the sides, feet shoulder-width apart), he paused and sonorously
said in a voice:
- So.
To the right and left of him other faces peered into the room. I said, "I'm sorry," and ran to my jeans. However, they paid no attention to me. Four people entered the room and crowded around the sofa. I knew two: gloomy Korneev, unshaven, with red eyes,
still in the same frivolous Hawaiian shirt, and swarthy, hook-nosed Roman, who winked at me, made an incomprehensible sign with his hand and immediately turned away. I did not know the gray-haired one. Nor did I know a stout, tall man in a black suit, shining from the back, and with broad masterly movements.
- This sofa? asked the shiny man.
“This is not a sofa,” said Korneev sullenly. - It's a translator.
“For me, it’s a sofa,” said the shiny one, looking into his notebook. - The sofa is soft, one and a half, inventory number eleven twenty-three. He leaned over and touched. - Here you have it
wet, Korneev, dragged in the rain. Now consider: the springs are rusted, the skin is rotten.
– The value of this item, – as it seemed to me, mockingly said hook-nosed Roman, – is by no means in the sheathing and not even in the springs, which are not there.
“Stop it, Roman Petrovich,” the shiny one offered with dignity. - You don’t shield your Korneev for me. The sofa passes through my museum and should be there ...
“This is a device,” said Korneev hopelessly. - Working with him...
“That I don’t know,” declared the shiny one. – I don’t know what kind of work with a sofa is. I have here
there is also a sofa at home, and I know how people work on it.
“We know that too,” Roman said softly.
“You will stop this,” said the shiny one, turning to him. - You are not in the pub here, you
here at the institution. What do you actually mean?“I mean it's not a sofa,” Roman said. - Or, in a form accessible to you, it is
there is not quite a sofa. This is a device that has the appearance of a sofa.
“I would ask you to stop these hints,” the shiny one said resolutely. - About available
forms and all. Let's each do our part. My business is to stop squandering, and I
stop.
"Yes," the gray-haired man said loudly. It immediately became quiet. – I spoke with Cristobal Hosevich and
with Fedor Simeonovich. They believe that this translator sofa is only a museum piece.
value. At one time it belonged to King Rudolf II, so the historical value
its undeniable. In addition, two years ago, if my memory serves me right, we already ordered a serial translator ... Who ordered it, do you remember, Modest Matveyevich?
“Just a minute,” said the shiny Modest Matveyevich, and quickly began flipping through his notebook.
book. – Just a minute… Two-way translator TDH-80E of the Kitezhgrad plant… On request
Comrade Balsamo.
“Balsamo works on it around the clock,” Roman said.
“And this TDH is junk,” Korneev added. – Selectivity at the molecular level.
“Yes, yes,” the gray-haired man said. - I remember. There was a report on the TDH study. Action-
Therefore, the selectivity curve is not smooth... Yes. And this… er… sofa?
“Manual labor,” Roman said quickly. - Reliable. Designs by Leo Ben Bezalel. Ben Bezalel has been collecting and debugging it for three hundred years ...
- Here! - said the shiny Modest Matveyevich. - That's how it should work! The old man did everything
myself.
The mirror suddenly coughed and said:
- All of them rejuvenated after spending an hour in the water, and came out of it as beautiful, pink, young and healthy, strong and cheerful as they were at twenty years old.
“Exactly,” said Modest Matveyevich. The mirror spoke in the voice of a gray-haired man.
The gray-haired man grimaced in annoyance.
"Let's not decide this issue now," he said.
- And when? asked the rude Korneev.
- Friday at the Academic Council.
“We cannot squander relics,” put in Modest Matveyevich.
– And what are we going to do? asked the rude Korneev.
The mirror murmured in a menacing sepulchral voice:
I myself saw how, having picked up black dresses,
Canidia walked barefoot, bare-haired, howling,
With her and Sagan, older in years, and both pale.
They looked terrible. Here they began the earth with their nails
Both dig and tear the black with the teeth of a lamb ...
The gray-haired man, all wrinkled, went up to the mirror, put his hand into it up to his shoulder and with something
clicked. The mirror was silent.
“Yes,” the gray-haired man said. - We will also decide on the issue of your group at the council. And you... -
it was evident on his face that he had forgotten Korneev's name and patronymic - for the time being, you refrain ... er ... from visiting the museum.
With these words, he left the room. Through the door
“We got our way,” said Korneev through gritted teeth, looking at Modest Matveyevich.
“I won’t let you squander it,” he answered curtly, thrusting a note into his inner pocket.
book.
- Squander! Korneev said. - You don't care about any of this. You are worried about reporting. It is reluctant to enter an extra column.
“You will stop this,” said the adamant Modest Matveyevich. - We will appoint a commission
and see if the relic is damaged...
“Inventory number eleven twenty-three,” Roman added in an undertone.
“In such an acceptance,” Modest Matveyevich said majestically, turned and saw me. – What are you doing here? he inquired. - Why are you sleeping here?
“I…” I began.
“You slept on the couch,” Modest announced in an icy tone, piercing me with the eyes of a counterintelligence officer. Do you know what this device is?
“No,” I said. - That is now known, of course.
- Modest Matveyevich! exclaimed the hook-nosed Roman. – This is our new programmer, Sasha.
Privalov!
Why is he sleeping here? Why not in a hostel?
“He's not enrolled yet,” Roman said, putting his arm around my waist.
- Especially!
- So, let him sleep on the street? Korneev asked angrily.
“You will stop this,” said Modest. - There is a hostel, there is a hotel, and here is a museum, a state institution. If everyone sleeps in museums… Where are you from?
“From Leningrad,” I said grimly.
- What if I come to Leningrad and go to sleep in the Hermitage?
“Please,” I said, shrugging.
Roman kept holding me by the waist.
- Modest Matveyevich, you are absolutely right, it's a mess, but today he will spend the night with me.
- That's another matter. This is please, - generously allowed Modest. He is a master's eye
looked around the room, saw prints on the ceiling and immediately looked at my feet. Luckily I was
barefoot. “In such an acceptance,” he said, straightened the junk on the hanger and went out.
“D-club,” Korneev squeezed out of himself. - Stump. He sat down on the sofa and shook his head. - well them
all to hell. Tonight, I'll take it down again.
"Calm down," Roman said softly. - It's OK. We're just a little unlucky. You
notice what kind of Janus it is?
- Well? - said Korneev hopelessly.
“It's A-Janus.
Korneev raised his head.
- And what's the difference?
– Huge, – Roman said and winked. – Because U-Janus flew to Moscow. And in particular
about this sofa. Understood, plunderer of museum valuables?
“Listen, you are saving me,” said Korneev, and for the first time I saw him smile.
“The thing is, Sasha,” Roman said, turning to me, “that we have an ideal director. He
one in two persons. There is A-Janus Poluektovich and U-Janus Poluektovich. U-Janus is a great scientist
international class. As for A-Janus, he is a rather ordinary administrator.
- Twins? I asked carefully.
No, it's the same person. Only he is one in two faces.
“I see,” I said, and began to put on my boots.
“Nothing, Sasha, you’ll soon find out everything,” Roman said encouragingly.
I raised my head.
- That is?
“We need a programmer,” Roman said heartily.
“I really need a programmer,” said Korneev, brightening up.
“Everyone needs a programmer,” I said, returning to my boots. - And I ask without hypnosis and all sorts of enchanted places.
“He already knows,” said Roman.
Korneev wanted to say something, but shouts broke out outside the window.
- This is not our penny! shouted Modest.
- And whose penny is this?
- I don't know whose penny it is! It's none of my business! It's your job to catch counterfeiters, comrade sergeant!..
- Pyatak was confiscated from a certain Privalov, who lives here with you, in Iznakurnozh! ..
- Oh, at Privalov's? I immediately thought he was a thief!
The reproachful voice of A-Janus said:
- Well, well, Modest Matveyevich! ..
- No, sorry, Janus Poluektovich! You can't leave it like this! Comrade Sergeant, let's go!
He's in the house... Janus Poluektovich, stand by the window so he doesn't jump out! I'll prove! I will not let
cast a shadow on Comrade Gorynych!...
I feel bad inside. But Roman had already assessed the situation. He grabbed from the hanger
greasy cap and put it on my ears.
I disappeared.
It was a very strange feeling. Everything remained in place, everything except me. But Roman did not
I am filled with new experiences.
"It's an invisibility cap," he hissed. - Step aside and shut up.
I tiptoed back to the corner and sat under the mirror. At the same moment, an excited Modest burst into the room, dragging the young sergeant Kovalev by the sleeve.
- Where is he? yelled Modest, looking around.
“Here,” Roman said, pointing to the sofa.
“Don’t worry, it’s standing still,” Korneev added.
- I'm asking, where is this your ... programmer?
- What programmer? Roman was surprised.
“You will stop this,” said Modest. There was a programmer here. He stood in trousers and no boots
nok.
"Ah, that's what you mean," said Roman. “But we were joking, Modest Matveyevich. Not
there was no programmer here. It was just…” He made some movement with his hands, and a man in a T-shirt and jeans appeared in the middle of the room. I saw him from the back and nothing to say about him
I can’t, but young Kovalyov shook his head and said:
- No, it is not him.
Modest circled the ghost, muttering:
- T-shirt ... pants ... no shoes ... He! It is he.
The ghost is gone.
“No, it’s not the same one,” said Sergeant Kovalev. - He was young, without a beard ...
- Without a beard? Modest asked. He was very embarrassed.
“Without a beard,” Kovalev confirmed.
“Hmmm…” said Modest. I think he had a beard...
“So I am handing you a summons,” said young Kovalyov, and handed Modest a piece of government-issued paper. - And you yourself deal with your Privalov and your Gorynych ...
- And I'm telling you that this is not our penny! shouted Modest. - I don’t say anything about Privalov,
maybe there is no Privalov as such ... But Comrade Gorynych is our employee! ..
Young Kovalev, pressing his hands to his chest, tried to say something.
“I want it sorted out immediately!” yelled Modest. “Stop it for me, comrade militia! This agenda casts a shadow on the entire team! I demand that you make sure!
- I have an order ... - Kovalev began, but Modest shouted: “You stop this! I insist!" - rushed at him and dragged him out of the room.
“He took me to the museum,” said Roman. - Sasha, where are you? Take off your cap, let's go see...
“Maybe it’s better not to shoot?” - I said.
“Take off, take off,” said Roman. You are now a phantom. Now no one believes in you - neither the administration, nor the police ...
Korneev said:
Well, I went to bed. Sasha, you come after dinner. Take a look at our fleet of cars and in general ...
I took off my hat.
“You stop this,” I said. - I'm on vacation.
"Let's go, let's go," said Roman.
In the hallway, Modest, clinging to the sergeant with one hand, with the other unlocked a powerful hanging
lock. “Now I’ll show you our penny! he shouted. “Everything is credited… Everything is in place.” - "Yes I
I don’t say anything,” Kovalev weakly defended himself. - I'm just saying that there may not be nickels
alone…” Modest opened the door, and we all entered a large room.
It was quite a decent museum - with stands, diagrams, showcases, models and models. The general view most of all resembled a museum of criminology: many photographs and unappetizing
exhibits. Modest immediately dragged the sergeant somewhere behind the stands, and there they both hummed like a barrel: “Here is our penny ...” - “But I don’t say anything ...” - “Comrade Gorynych ...” - “And I have an order !. ."
“You will stop this for me!”
“Be curious, be curious, Sasha,” Roman said, made a grand gesture and sat down in an armchair at the entrance.
I went along the wall. I wasn't surprised at anything. I was just very interested. “Water is alive.
Efficiency 52%. Permissible sediment 0.3 "(an old rectangular bottle of water, the cork is filled with colored wax). "Scheme of industrial extraction of living water". "Layout of a live-water distillation cube". "Veshkovsky-Traubenbach's love potion" (pharmaceutical jar with poisonous yellow
ointment). “Ordinary corrupted blood” (sealed ampoule with black liquid) ... Above all this
A sign hung on the stand: “Active chemicals. XII-XVIII centuries. There were many more bottles, jars, retorts, ampoules, test tubes, working and non-working models of installations for
sublimations, distillations and thickening, but I went further.
“Treasure sword” (a very rusty two-handed sword with a wavy blade, chained to an iron rack, the display case is carefully sealed). “The right eye (working) tooth of Count Dracula of the Transdanubian” (I am not Cuvier, but, judging by this tooth, Count Dracula of the Transdanubian was a very strange and unpleasant person). “The trace is ordinary and the trace is taken out. Gypsum castings "(traces, in my opinion, are not
differed from each other, but one casting was cracked). “Stupa on the launch pad. IX century"
(a powerful structure made of gray porous cast iron) ... “Snake Gorynych, skeleton, 1/25 nat. led." (Seems like
on the skeleton of a diplodocus with three necks) ... "Scheme of the work of the fire-breathing gland of the middle head" ...
“Gravity walking boots, working model” (very large rubber boots) ... “Gravity-protective flying carpet. The current model "(carpet about one and a half by one and a half with a Circassian,
hugging a young Circassian against the backdrop of tribal mountains)…
I reached the "Development of the Philosopher's Stone Idea" display when Sgt.
Kovalev and Modest Matveevich. Apparently, they never managed to get off the ground. "You
Stop it,” said Modest languidly. “I have an order,” Kovalev answered just as languidly. "Our
a nickel is in place ... "-" Let the old woman come and testify ... "-" What do you think, are we false
shivomonetchiki?..” - “I didn’t say that ...” - “Shadow on the whole team ...” - “We’ll figure it out ...” Kovalev did not notice me, but Modest stopped, looked dully from head to toe, and then looked up,
languidly read aloud: "Go-munku-lus laboratory, general view" - and went on.
I followed him, feeling bad. Roman was waiting for us at the door.
- Well, how? - he asked.
“A disgrace,” said Modest languidly. - Bureaucrats.
“I have an order,” Sergeant Kovalev repeated stubbornly from the hallway.
“Well, come out, Roman Petrovich, come out,” said Modest, jingling his keys.
The novel is out. I tried to follow him, but Modest stopped me.
“I'm sorry,” he said. – Where are you?
- How - where? I asked in a low voice.
- Go to the place, go to the place.
- To what place?
- Well, where are you standing there? Excuse me, are you ... ham-munculs? So stay where you are...
I realized that I was dead. And I probably would have died, because Roman, apparently, was also confused,
but at that moment Naina Kievna burst into the hall with a clatter and a thud, leading a hefty black goat on a rope. At the sight of the militia sergeant, the goat let out an evil voice and rushed
away. Naina Kievna fell. Modest rushed into the hallway, and an unimaginable noise arose. An empty tub rolled with a roar. Roman grabbed my hand and, whispering: “Go, go! ..” – rushed into my room. We slammed the door behind us and leaned against it, breathing heavily. In the hall
shouted:
- Submit your documents!
- Father, what is it!
- Why a goat? Why is there a goat in the room?!
- Me-ee-e-e-e...
“Stop this, this is not a beer garden!”
- I don’t know your nickels and I don’t know!
- Meeeee!..
- Citizen, remove the goat!
- Stop it, the goat is credited!
- How credited?
- It's not a goat! This is our employee!
- Then let him present! ..
- Through the window - and into the car! Roman ordered.
I grabbed my jacket and jumped out the window. Basil the cat shied away from under my feet with a meow. Bending down, I ran to the car, opened the door and jumped behind the wheel. Roman was already rolling back the collar.
The motor didn't start. Tormenting the starter, I saw how the door of the hut swung open, flew out of the hallway
the black goat and giant leaps rushed away somewhere around the corner. The motor roared. I unrolled
car and drove out into the street. The oak gate slammed shut with a bang. Roman emerged from the gate
and sat down beside me.
- Go! he said cheerfully. - To the center!
When we turned onto Mira Avenue, he asked:
- Well, how do you like us?
“I like it,” I said. - It's just very noisy.
“Naina's is always noisy,” said Roman. - A naughty old woman. Did she hate you?
“No,” I said. - We almost did not communicate.
“Wait a minute,” said Roman. - Slow down.
- And what?
- And there Volodya is coming. Do you remember Volodya?
I slowed down. The bearded Volodya climbed into the back seat and, smiling happily, shook hands with us.
- That's great! - he said. - I'm on my way to you!
“The only thing missing was you,” Roman said.
- And how did it all end?
“Nothing,” said Roman.
– Where are you going now?
“To the institute,” said Roman.
- For what? I asked.
“Work,” said Roman.
- I'm on vacation.
"It doesn't matter," Roman said. – Monday starts on Saturday, and this time August starts in July!
“The guys are waiting for me,” I said pleadingly.
“We take care of that,” said Roman. The kids won't notice at all.
“Go crazy,” I said.
We drove between store number 2 and dining room number 11.
“He already knows where to go,” Volodya remarked.
“Great guy,” Roman said. - Giant!
“I liked him right away,” Volodya said.
“Apparently you desperately need a programmer,” I said.
“We don't need just any programmer,” Roman objected.
I stopped near a strange building with a sign "NIICHAVO" between the windows.
- What does this mean? I asked. “May I at least find out where I am being forced to work?”
“You can,” said Roman. - You can do anything now. This is a Research Institute
Sorcery and Magic… Well, what have you become? Drive the car!
- Where? I asked.
“Well, don’t you see?
And I saw.
But that's a completely different story.Story two
VANITY
Chapter first
Among the heroes of the story, one or two main characters stand out, all the rest are considered as
secondary.
"Methods of teaching literature"At about two o'clock in the afternoon, when the fuse of the input device blew again in Aldan,
the phone rang. The deputy director for the administrative and economic part, Modest Matveyevich Kamnoedov, called.
“Privalov,” he said sternly, “why are you not there again?”
How is it out of place? - I was offended. Today was a busy day, and I forgot everything.
“You will stop this,” said Modest Matveyevich. - You should have been five minutes ago
come to my briefing.
“Yolki-sticks,” I said and hung up.
I turned off the car, took off my bathrobe and told the girls not to forget to turn off the electricity. The large corridor was empty, a blizzard was chalking behind the half-frozen windows. Putting on my jacket as I walked, I ran to the maintenance department.
Modest Matveyevich in a shiny suit majestically waited for me in his own waiting room.
Behind him, a small dwarf with hairy ears was despondently and diligently running his fingers over an extensive list.
“You, Privalov, are like some kind of… boor-munculs,” said Modest. - you are never there
in place.
Everyone tried to maintain only good relations with Modest Matveyevich, since
he was a powerful man, adamant and fantastically ignorant. So I barked:
"I'm listening!" and clicked his heels.
“Everything should be in its place,” continued Modest Matveyevich. - Always. You have a higher education, and you have grown glasses and a beard, but you cannot understand such a simple theorem.
- Will not happen again! I said rolling my eyes.
“You will stop this,” said Modest Matveyevich, softening. He took out a piece of paper from his pocket.
and looked at him for a while. “So, Privalov,” he said at last, “today you are interceding
on duty. Watching the institution during the holidays is a responsible occupation. This is not for you
buttons to press. First, fire safety. This is the first. Avoid spontaneous combustion. Monitor the de-energization of the production areas entrusted to you. And follow in person
without these tricks of yours with bifurcation and rasterization. Without these your doubles. If a combustion factor is detected, immediately call 01 and proceed to take action. On that
chance you get a signal pipe to call an emergency team ... - He handed me a platinum
whistle with inventory number. - Also, don't let anyone in. Here is a list of persons who are allowed to
Sheno use of laboratories at night, but still not allowed, because the holiday. In the entire institute, not a single living soul. All sorts of other souls there - let it be, but not a single living soul. Demons at the entrance and exit to speak. Do you understand the situation? Living souls are
must go in, and all others must not go out. Because there was already a precendent: the devil escaped
and stole the moon. A well-known precendent, even reflected in the movies. He looked at me significantly and suddenly asked for documents.
I obeyed. He carefully examined my pass, returned it and said:
- That's right. And then I had a suspicion that you are still a dubel. Like this. This means that at fifteen zero zero, in accordance with labor legislation, the working day will end, and everyone will hand over the keys to their production premises to you. After that, you personally inspect the territory.
In the future, make rounds every three hours for spontaneous combustion. At least two times
during the period of duty, visit the vivarium. If the warden is drinking tea, stop. There were signals
he drinks tea. In such an acceptance. Your post is in the director's office. You can relax on the sofa.
Tomorrow at sixteen zero zero you will be relieved by Pochkin Vladimir from Comrade Oira-Oira's laboratory.
Available?
“Quite,” I said.
I will call you at night and tomorrow afternoon. Personally. Can be controlled by a friend
head of staff.
“Understood,” I said, and glanced over the list.
The first on the list was the director of the institute, Janus Poluektovich Nevstruev, with a pencil
marked "two copies". The second was personally Modest Matveyevich, the third - fellow head of personnel citizen Demin Kerber Psoevich. And then there were names that I had never met anywhere.
- Anything not available? inquired Modest Matveyevich, who was watching me jealously.
“Here,” I said weightily, pointing my finger at the list, “there are comrades in the amount of ... mmm ... twenty-two copies, personally unknown to me. These surnames I would like with you personally
ventilate. - I looked him straight in the eyes and added firmly: - To avoid.
Modest Matveyevich took the list and looked at it at arm's length.
"That's right," he said condescendingly. - It’s just that you, Privalov, don’t know. Persons named from number four to number twenty-five and the last inclusive are included in the lists
persons admitted to night work posthumously. In order of recognition of their merits in the past. Now
available to you?
I was a little stunned, because getting used to all this was still very difficult.
"Take up your post," said Modest Matveyevich majestically. - I from my side and from
on behalf of the administration, I congratulate you, Comrade Privalov, on the coming New Year and wish you
you in the new year corresponding successes both in work and in personal life.
I also wished him the appropriate success and went out into the corridor.
Having learned yesterday that I had been appointed on duty, I was delighted: I intended to finish
one calculation for Roman Oyra-Oyra. However, now I felt that things were not so simple.
The prospect of spending the night at the Institute suddenly presented itself to me in a completely new light. Me and
used to stay late at work, when the attendants, out of economy, were already extinguishing four lamps from
five in each corridor and had to make their way to the exit past some shy, furry shadows. At first it made a strong impression on me, then I got used to it, and then
I lost the habit again, when, one day, returning along a large corridor, I heard behind me the measured tsok-tsoktsok of claws on the parquet and, looking around, I found some kind of phosphorescent animal running clearly
in my footsteps. True, when they took me off the ledge, it turned out that it was an ordinary living
dog of one of the employees. An employee came to apologize, Oira-Oira gave me a mocking lecture about the dangers of superstition, but some sediment still remained in my soul. First thing
I will speak the demons, I thought.
At the entrance to the director's reception room, I met the gloomy Vitka Korneev. He nodded grimly and
wanted to pass by, but I caught him by the sleeve.
- Well? - said the rude Korneev, stopping.
“I’m on duty today,” I said.
“What a fool,” said Korneev.
“You’re still rude, Vitka,” I said. “I won’t talk to you anymore.
Vitka pulled the sweater collar with his finger and looked at me with interest.
- And what will you do? - he asked.
“Yes, I’ll find something,” I said, somewhat bewildered.
Vitka suddenly perked up.
“Wait a minute,” he said. - Are you on duty for the first time?
- Yes.
“Yeah,” Vitka said. "And how are you going to proceed?"
“According to the instructions,” I replied. “I will speak the demons and go to bed.” For spontaneous combustion. And where are you going?
“Yes, one company is going there,” Vitka said vaguely. - At Verochka ... And what is this with you? He took the list from me. Ah, dead souls...
“I won’t let anyone in,” I said. Neither the living nor the dead.
“The right decision,” Victor said. - Archival. Just take a look at my lab. There I will have a duplicate.
Whose double?
My double, of course. Who will give me his? I locked it there, here, take the key, since you
duty.
I took the key.
- Listen, Vitka, let him work until ten o'clock, but then I will turn off the power. In accordance with the law.
- All right, we'll see. Have you met Edik?
“I didn’t,” I said. “And don’t fill my buckets. At ten o'clock I'll shut everything down.
- Am I against it? De-energize, please. Even the whole city.
Then the door of the waiting room opened, and Janus Poluektovich stepped out into the corridor.
“Yes,” he said when he saw us.
I bowed respectfully. Janus Poluektovich's face showed that he had forgotten how
name.
“Please,” he said, handing me the keys. - You're on duty, if I'm not mistaken ... By the way ... - He hesitated. “Didn’t I talk to you yesterday?”
“Yes,” I said, “you went into the electronic room.
He nodded.
- Yes, yes, indeed ... We were talking about trainees ...
“No,” I replied respectfully, “not quite like that. It's about our letter to Centracademsnab.
About the electronics.
“Oh, that’s how it is,” he said. - Well, I wish you a quiet watch ... Viktor Pavlovich,
can i have you for a minute?
He took Vitka by the arm and led him down the corridor, and I went into the waiting room. In the waiting room the second Janus
Poluektovich locked the safes. When he saw me, he said: "So," and again began to jingle the keys.
It was A-Janus, I already learned a little to distinguish between them. A-Janus looked somewhat younger, was
unfriendly, always correct and taciturn. It was said that he works a lot, and people
those who knew him for a long time claimed that this mediocre administrator was slowly but surely turning into an outstanding scientist. U-Janus, on the contrary, was always affectionate, very attentive and had a strange habit of asking: "Didn't I talk to you yesterday?" It was said that he was very
passed recently, although he remained a world-famous scientist. And yet A-Janus and U-Janus
were the same person. This is something that didn't fit in my head. There was some convention in it. I even suspected that it was just a metaphor.
A-Janus closed the last lock, handed me some of the keys, and, after a cold farewell, left. I
sat down at the referent's table, put the list in front of him, and called his electronic room. Nobody
did not respond - apparently, the girls had already dispersed. It was fourteen thirty minutes.
At fourteen thirty-one minutes into the waiting room, puffing noisily and cracking the parquet,
the famous Fyodor Simeonovich Kivrin, the great magician and magician, head of the department of Linear Happiness, burst in. Fedor Simeonovich was famous for his incorrigible optimism and belief in a wonderful future. He had a very turbulent past. Under Ivan Vasilievich, Tsar the Terrible, guardsmen of the then Minister of State Security Malyuta Skuratov with jokes and jokes
they burned him at the denunciation of a neighbor-clerk in a wooden bathhouse as a sorcerer; under Alexei Mikhailovich - Tsar
In the quietest, they beat him mercilessly with batogs and burned a complete manuscript collection on his bare back
his writings; under Peter Alekseevich, the Great Tsar, he first rose as a connoisseur of chemistry and mining, but did not indulge the Prince-Caesar Romodanovsky in some way, ended up in hard labor at the Tula arms factory, fled from there to India, traveled for a long time, the bite was poisonous snakes and
crocodiles, insensibly surpassed yoga, returned to Russia again at the height of the Pugachevshchina, was
accused as a healer of rebels, beznozdren and exiled to Solovets forever. In Solovets again
had a lot of troubles until he joined NIICHAVO, where he quickly took the post of head of the department and recently worked hard on the problems of human happiness, selflessly
fighting with those colleagues who believed that contentment was the basis of happiness.
“W-greetings!” he boomed, placing the keys to his laboratories in front of me. – B-
poor fellow, how are you? Y-you need to have fun on a t-night like this, I’ll c-call Modest, what nonsense, I’ll c-be on duty myself ...
It was evident that this thought had just entered his head, and he was terribly inflamed with it.
“W-well, where is his t-phone?” D-damn, n-never t-remember t-phones… One-fifteen or f-five-eleven…
- What are you, Fyodor Simeonovich, thank you! I cried. - No need! I'm just here to work!
“Ah, p-work!” This is a different matter! Et' t-good, t' great, you m-well done! .. And I, f-damn
I don’t know the hell about electronics ... I-I need to study, but all this m-magic of the word, s-junk, f-tricks, p-psycho-fields, p-primitive ... D-old-fashioned p-tricks ...He immediately, without leaving the spot, created two large antonovka, handed one to me, and immediately bit off half of the second and began to crunch juicy.
“D-damn, I did something d-wormy again… How are you – d-good?” That's good... I'll d-l-l-l-l-l-l-l-o-o later, Sasha, otherwise I d-don't quite d-understand the system of c-commands after all... V-vodka
I’ll just have a drink and s-go in ... T-twenty d-ninth s-team you have there in the m-car ... Is it a car
he’s lying, or I c-don’t understand ... D-detective I’ll f-bring you, G-gardner. Y-you read English, don't you? X-good, rogue, writes, s-great! P-perry Mason he has there, s-beast lawyer, you know?.. And t-then something else d-dam, s-science-fiction s-something ... Az-Zimova there, or Bbradbury ...
He went to the window and said admiringly:
- P-blizzard, damn it, l-love! ..
Wrapped in a mink coat, thin and graceful Cristobal Chozevich Junta entered. Fyodor Simeonovich turned around.
“Ah, K-cristo!” he exclaimed. “L-look at it, this stone-eater, f-fool, planted a m-young
n-guy to be on duty n-for the New Year. L-let's let him go, we'll stay together, c-remember the old days, let's drink, huh? W-what will he suffer here? .. He needs to d-dance, with d-girls ...
Junta put the keys on the table and said casually:
- Communication with girls is a pleasure only in those cases when it is achieved through
overcoming obstacles…
- W-well, more! thundered Fyodor Simeonovich. “M-a lot of blood, a lot of s-song for the lovely ladies… H-how are you doing there?.. Only those who don’t know the s-word will reach the goal
"fear"…
“Exactly,” Junta said. - And then - I do not tolerate charity.
- He does not tolerate charity! And who begged Odikhmantiev from me? P-poached, you understand, such a laboratory assistant ... Now put a b-bottle of champagne, n-no less ... S-listen, don’t
need some champagne! Amontillado! Do you still have t-Toledo stock left?
“They are waiting for us, Theodore,” Junta reminded them.
- Y-yes, right ... We still need to find a tie ... and felt boots, you can’t f-get a taxi ... We went,
Sasha, don't be bored here.
- On New Year's Eve at the institute, the attendants do not get bored, - Junta said quietly. - Especially
newcomers.
They went to the door. The junta let Fyodor Simeonovich go ahead and, before leaving, askance
He looked at me and quickly drew Solomon's star on the wall with his finger. The star flared up and became
fade slowly, like the trace of an electron beam on an oscilloscope screen. I spat three times over my left shoulder.Cristobal Hozevich Junta, head of the Department of the Meaning of Life, was a wonderful person,
but apparently completely heartless. Once upon a time, in early youth, he was a great one for a long time.
Inquisitor, but then fell into heresy, although to this day he retained his then manners, very
however, they came in handy, according to rumors, during the struggle against the fifth column in Spain. Almost
he carried out all his incomprehensible experiments either on himself or on his employees, and this was already discussed indignantly in front of me at a general trade union meeting. He was engaged
the study of the meaning of life, but has not progressed very far yet, although it has obtained interesting results, proving, for example, theoretically, that death is by no means an indispensable attribute of life. This latest discovery was also indignant - at a philosophical seminar. To the office
he hardly let anyone in, and vague rumors circulated around the institute that there were a lot of interesting
of things. It was said that in the corner of the office stood a superbly executed effigy of an ancient
an acquaintance of Cristobal Chozevich, SS Standartenführer, in full dress uniform, with a monocle,
dagger, iron cross, oak leaves and other personal belongings. Junta was a great taxidermist. Standartenführer, according to Cristobal Chozevich, too. But Cristobal
Khozevich managed earlier. He liked to be ahead of time - always and in everything. Some
skepticism. In one of his laboratories there was a huge poster: "Do we need us?" A very uncommon person.
At exactly three o'clock, in accordance with labor legislation, the doctor of sciences brought the keys
Amvrosy Ambruazovich Vibegallo. He was in felt boots lined with leather, in a fragrant cab
sheepskin coat, a greyish unclean beard protruded forward from the turned-up collar. He cut his hair under
pot, so no one ever saw his ears.
“This…” he said as he approached. - I have there, maybe today someone will hatch. In the laboratory,
to mean. You should take a look at this one. I put stocks for him there, this one, bread, that means five loaves,
Well, there's steamed bran, two buckets back. Well, like everything else, this one will eat, start throwing, that means. So you
me, mon cher, that, blurt out, dear.
He placed a bunch of barn keys in front of me and, in some embarrassment, opened his mouth to stare at me. His eyes were transparent, and millet stuck out in his beard.
- Where to blurt-ta? I asked.
I didn't like him very much. He was a cynic, and he was a fool. The job he did for three hundred
fifty rubles a month, one could safely call it eugenics, but no one called it that -
afraid to contact. This Vibegallo declared that all troubles, this one, stem from displeasure and
if, it means, to give a person everything - bread, that means steamed bran - then there will be not a man, but an angel. He pushed through this simple idea in every possible way, waving volumes of classics, from which, with indescribable innocence, he tore out quotes with blood, mercilessly omitting and blacking out everything that did not
fit. At one time, the Academic Council trembled under the onslaught of this unstoppable, some even primitive demagogy, and the theme of Vibegalla was included in the plan. Acting strictly according to this plan, diligently measuring his achievements in percentage of completion and never forgetting about the savings regime, increasing the turnover of working capital, as well as the connection with life, Vibegallo laid
three experimental models: the model of a Human who is completely unsatisfied, the model of a Human,
unsatisfied stomach, and a model of a Human who is completely satisfied. The completely unsatisfied anthropoid was the first to ripen - he hatched two weeks ago. This pitiful creature
covered with ulcers like Job, half decomposed, tormented by all known and unknown diseases, incredibly hungry, suffering from cold and heat at the same time, fell out into the corridor,
announced the institute with a series of inarticulate complaints and died. Vibegallo triumphed. Now
it could be considered proven that if a person is not fed, watered, or treated, then he, this one, will, therefore, be unhappy and even, perhaps, die. How did this one die. The Academic Council was horrified. idea
Vibegalli turned into some kind of terrible side. A commission was formed to review the work
Vybegally. But he, not at a loss, presented two certificates, from which it followed, firstly, that
three laboratory assistants of his laboratory annually go to work in the sponsored state farm, and, secondly,
that he, Vibegallo, was once a prisoner of tsarism, and now regularly gives popular lectures in
city ​​lecture hall and on the periphery. And while the stunned commission tried to figure out the logic
what is happening, he slowly took out from the sponsored fish factory (in connection with production)
four truckloads of herring heads for a maturing anthropoid, gastrically unsatisfied.
The commission wrote a report, and the institute waited in fear for further events. Vibegalla's neighbors by floor
took vacations at their own expense.
- Where to blurt-ta? I asked.
– Bryakt-ta? And home, where else on New Year's Eve. There has to be a moral, honey. New Year
you have to meet at home. So it comes out our way, carried pa?
- I know it's home. By what phone?
- And you, this one, look in the book. Literate? So look, then, in a book. We have
there are no secrets, not like others have. An mass2.
“Okay,” I said. - Bryaknu.
- Shout out, mon cher, shout out. And he will start to bite, so you are on the tinsel, do not be shy. Se la1Is not it? (French) Vibegallo loves to intersperse individual phrases in French into his speech, as he
expressed in dialect. Without being responsible for its pronunciation, we took it upon ourselves to provide a translation. (Note
authors.)
2In the mass, in the majority (French).
vi3.
I plucked up courage and grumbled:
- But we didn’t drink at brotherhood.
- Sorry?
“Nothing, that’s just me,” I said.
For some time he looked at me with his transparent eyes, in which there was nothing at all.
expressed, then said:
“Nothing, it’s good that it’s nothing.” Happy holiday to you. Be healthy. Arivuar4, mean.
He put on his hat and left. I hastily opened the window. Roman Oira-Oira flew in in a green coat with a lambskin collar, wiggled his hooked nose and inquired:
- Run out run out?
“Zabegallo,” I said.
“Y-yes,” he said. - It's a herring. Hold the keys. Do you know where he dumped one truck? Under
windows by Gian Giacomo. Right below the office. New Year's present. I'll smoke you here
cigarette.
He sank into a huge leather armchair, unbuttoned his overcoat, and lit a cigarette.
“Come on, get on with it,” he said. - Given: the smell of herring brine, intensity sixteen
microaxes, cubature…” He looked around the room. - Well, you'll figure it out yourself, the year is at a turning point, Saturn is in
constellation Libra ... Delete!
I scratched behind my ear.
– Saturn… What do you mean about Saturn… And what is the magistatum vector?
“Well, brother,” said Oira-Oira, “it’s up to you…
I scratched behind my other ear, figured out the vector in my mind and, stammering, made an acoustic impact (said a spell). Oira-Oira pinched his nose. I pulled out two hairs from my eyebrow (terribly painful and
stupid) and polarized the vector. The smell got stronger again.
“Bad,” Oira-Oira said reproachfully. "What are you doing, sorcerer's apprentice?" Don't you see
that the vent is open?
“Ah,” I said, “that’s right. – I took into account the divergence and curl, tried to solve the Stokes equation in
mind, got confused, pulled out, breathing through his mouth, two more hairs, sniffed, muttered the Auers spell and was just about to pull out another hair, but then it turned out that the reception room was ventilated naturally, and Roman advised me to save my eyebrows and close the window.
“Mediocre,” he said. Let's get down to materialization.
For a while we were engaged in materialization. I created pears, and Roman demanded that I
ate them. I refused to eat, and then he made me create again. “You will work until you get something edible,” he said. “And give this to Modest.” He is our Kamnoyed. At the end
In the end, I created a real pear - big, yellow, soft like butter, and bitter like cinchona. I
I ate it, and Roman allowed me to rest.3Such is life (French).4Goodbye (French)
Then the bachelor of black magic Magnus Fyodorovich Redkin brought the keys, fat, as always preoccupied and offended. He received his bachelor's degree three hundred years ago for inventing the stealth porter. Since then, he has improved and improved these trousers. Invisible trousers
first they turned into invisibility culottes, then into invisible trousers, and finally, quite recently, they began to be spoken of as invisible trousers. And he couldn't fix them. On the last
meeting of the seminar on black magic, when he made the next report "On some new properties of Redkin's invisible trousers", he again failed. During the demonstration of the upgraded model, something got stuck in the button-suspender mechanism, and the trousers, instead of
make the inventor invisible, suddenly with a ringing click they themselves became invisible. It got very awkward. However, Magnus Fedorovich mainly worked on his dissertation, the topic of which was: “Materialization and linear naturalization of the White Thesis as an argument for a rather arbitrary sigma function of not quite imaginable human happiness.”
Here he achieved significant and important results, from which it followed that humanity would literally bathe in an unimaginable happiness if only it were possible to find the White Thesis itself, and most importantly, to understand what it is and where to look for it.
The White Thesis was mentioned only in the diaries of Ben Bezalel. Ben Bezalel supposedly
singled out the White Thesis as a by-product of some alchemical reaction and, having no time to deal with such a trifle, built it as an auxiliary element into some of his device. IN
in one of his last memoirs, written in prison, Ben Bezalel reported: “And can you imagine? That White Thesis did not justify my hopes, did not justify. And when I realized
what use it could be - I'm talking about happiness for all people, how many there are - I already forgot
where did I put it in? The institute had seven instruments that once belonged to Ben
Bezalel. Redkin dismantled six of them to the screw and did not find anything special. The seventh device was a sofa-translator. But Vitka Korneev laid his hand on the sofa, and the darkest suspicions crept into Redkin's simple soul. He began to follow Vitka. Vitka immediately went berserk.
They quarreled and became sworn enemies, and have remained so to this day. As a representative of the exact sciences, Magnus Fedorovich treated me favorably, although he condemned my friendship with
"this plagiarist". In general, Redkin was a good person, very hardworking, very
stubborn, completely devoid of greed. He did a tremendous job, collecting a gigantic
collection of various definitions of happiness. There were the simplest negative definitions
(“Happiness is not in money”), the simplest positive definitions (“Higher satisfaction, complete
contentment, success, luck"), casuistic definitions ("Happiness is the absence of unhappiness") and paradoxical ("Happiest of all jesters, fools, utterly stupid and negligent, because they do not reproach conscience
know that they are not afraid of ghosts and other undead, they are not tormented by the fear of future disasters, they are not deceived by the hope of future blessings.
Magnus Fedorovich put the box with the key on the table and, looking at us from under his brows incredulously, said:
I have found another definition.
- Which? I asked.
“Something like poetry. Only there is no rhyme. Want to?
“Of course we do,” said Roman.
Magnus Fyodorovich took out a notebook and stammeringly read:
You are asking:
What do I think
Am I the highest happiness on earth?
Two things:
Change the state of mind in the same way,
How would I exchange a penny for a shilling,
AND
young girl
Hear the singing
Out of my way, but following
How I found out the way.
“I didn’t understand anything,” said Roman. Let me read with my eyes.
Redkin gave him the notebook and explained:
This is Christopher Logue. From English.
“Excellent poetry,” said Roman.
Magnus Fyodorovich sighed.
Some say one thing, others say another.
"It's hard," I said sympathetically.
– Is it true? Well, how do you tie everything together? Girls to hear singing ... And after all, not all singing is any, but for the girl to be young, to be out of his way, and even only after
he will ask him about the road ... Is it really possible? Are such things algorithmized?
“Not likely,” I said. - I wouldn't take it.
- You see! – picked up Magnus Fedorovich. - And you are the head of the computer center! To whom then?
“Maybe it doesn’t exist at all?” Roman said in the voice of a film provocateur.
- What?
- Happiness.
Magnus Fedorovich was immediately offended.
“How can it not exist,” he said with dignity, “when I myself have repeatedly experienced it?
“Changing a penny for a shilling?” Roman asked.
Magnus Fedorovich was even more offended and tore out his notebook.
“You are still young…” he began.
But then there was a roar, a crackle, a flash of flame and a smell of sulfur. In the middle of the reception
Merlin. Magnus Fedorovich, who shied away from surprise to the window, said: “Pah on you!” - And
ran out.
– Good God! Oira-Oira said, rubbing his powdered eyes. – Canst thou not come in by
usual way as decent people do?.. Sir5, he added.5God! Is the usual path ordered for you, the path of a worthy person? .. Sir (Old English).
“Beg thy pardon,” Merlin said smugly and looked at me with satisfaction. I must have been pale, because I was very afraid of spontaneous combustion.
Merlin straightened his moth-eaten robes, tossed a bunch of keys on the table, and said:
“Have you noticed, sirs, what the weather is like?”
“Foretold,” said Roman.
“Exactly, Sir Oira-Oira!” Precisely predicted!
“A useful thing is a radio,” said Roman.
"I don't listen to the radio," said Merlin. “I have my own methods.
He shook the hem of his robe and rose a meter off the floor.
“Chandelier,” I said, “be careful.
Merlin looked at the chandelier and suddenly began:
– O you, imbued with the spirit of Western materialism, low mercantilism and utilitarianism,
whose spiritual squalor is unable to rise above the darkness and chaos of petty gloomy worries...
I can’t help but remember, dear sirs, how last year Sir Comrade Pereyaslavlsky, Chairman of the District Council, and I…
Oira-Oira yawned heartbreakingly, I also felt sad. Merlin would probably still
worse than Vibegallo, if he were not so archaic and presumptuous. By someone's absent-mindedness
managed to advance to the head of the Department of Predictions and Prophecies, because in all the questionnaires he wrote about his uncompromising struggle against Yankee imperialism back in the early Middle Ages,
attaching to the questionnaires notarized typewritten copies of the relevant pages from
Mark Twain. Subsequently, due to the change in the internal situation and the warming of the international climate, he was again transferred to his place as head of the weather bureau, and now, like
a thousand years ago, engaged in predictions of atmospheric phenomena - and with the help of magical
means, and on the basis of the behavior of tarantulas, the intensification of rheumatic pains and the desire of Solovetsky pigs to lie down in the mud or get out of it. However, the main supplier of his forecasts
was the most vulgar radio interception, carried out by a detector receiver, rumored to have been stolen back in the twenties from the Solovetsky exhibition of young technicians. At the institute he was kept from
respect for old age. He was in great friendship with Naina Kievna Gorynych and together with her was engaged in collecting and spreading rumors about the appearance in the forests of a giant hairy
women and about the captivity of one student by Bigfoot from Elbrus. They also said that time
from time to time he takes part in night vigils on the Republican Bald Mountain with Ha Em Wiem,
Homa Brutus and other hooligans.
Roman and I were silent and waited for him to disappear. But he, packed in a mantle, is comfortable
settled down under the chandelier and began a long, long-satiated story about how he,
Merlin, and the chairman of the Solovetsky District Council, Comrade Pereyaslavlsky, carried out an inspection
trip around the region. This whole story was a pure lie, mediocre and opportunistic transcription of Mark Twain. He spoke about himself in the third person, and sometimes, confusedly, called the chairman King Arthur.
- So, the chairman of the district council and Merlin set off and came to the beekeeper, the Hero
Labor to Sir Otshelnichenko, who was a good knight and a noble honey collector. And Sir Otshelnichenko reported on his labor successes and treated Sir Arthur for sciatica with bee venom. AND
sir chairman lived there for three days, and his sciatica calmed down, and they set off, and on their way
Sir Ar... the chairman said, "I don't have a sword." “It doesn’t matter,” Merlin told him, “I will get you
sword". And they reached a large lake, and Arthur sees: a hand has risen from the lake, callused and its own,
and in that hand a sickle and a hammer. And Merlin said: "Here is the sword I told you about..."
Then the phone rang, and I gladly grabbed the receiver.
“Hello,” I said. Hello, they are listening.
They muttered something in the receiver, and Merlin pulled in a nasal voice: “... And near Lezhnev they met sir
Pellinore, but Merlin made it so that Pellinore did not notice the chairman ... "
"Sir Citizen Merlin," I said. - Could you be a little quieter? I hear nothing.
Merlin paused with the air of a man ready to continue at any moment.
“Hello,” I said again into the phone.
6I beg your pardon.
Who is at the device?
- And who do you need? I said out of old habit.
- Stop it for me. You are not in a booth, Privalov.
- I'm sorry, Modest Matveyevich. Privalov on duty listens.
- Like this. Report.
- What to report?
- Listen, Privalov. You are again behaving like I don't know who. Who did you talk to there?
Why are outsiders on duty? Why, in violation of labor laws, at the institute after
end of the working day are people?
"It's Merlin," I said.
- Throw him in the neck!
“With pleasure,” I said. (Merlin, no doubt eavesdropping, covered himself in spots, said, "Gr-rubyan!" - and vanished into thin air.)
With or without pleasure, that doesn't concern me. And here comes the signal
you pile the keys entrusted to you on the table instead of locking them in a drawer.
Vibegallo denounced, I thought.
- Why are you silent?
- Will be done.
“In such an acceptance,” said Modest Matveyevich. “You have to be vigilant.
Available?
- Available.
Modest Matveyevich said: “I have everything,” and hung up.
“All right,” said Oira-Oira, buttoning up his green coat. “I’m going to open canned food and uncork bottles. Be healthy, Sasha, I'll run back later.Chapter Two
I walked down the dark corridors and then up again. I was alone; I screamed, I didn't
answered; I was alone in this vast, intricate, like a labyrinth, house.
Guy de MaupassantI dropped the keys into my jacket pocket and made my first round. On the front staircase, which
in my memory they used it only once, when the august person from Africa visited the institute,
I descended into the vast vestibule, decorated with centuries-old layers of architectural
frills, and looked into the Swiss window. There, in the phosphorescent mist, loomed two of Maxwell's macro-demons. The demons were playing the most stochastic of games, the toss. They were doing
this is all their free time, huge, sluggish, indescribably ridiculous, most of all similar to colonies
polio virus under an electron microscope, dressed in shabby liveries. As befits Maxwell's demons, they spent their entire lives opening and closing doors. This
there were experienced, well-trained specimens, but one of them, the one in charge of the exit, had already reached retirement age, comparable to the age of the Galaxy, and from time to time fell into childhood and began to act up. Then someone from the Maintenance Department put on a space suit, climbed into a Swiss one filled with compressed argon, and brought the old man to his senses.
Following the instructions, I spoke to both, that is, I blocked the channels of information and closed
input-output devices. The demons did not react, they were not up to it. One won and
the other, respectively, lost, and this bothered them, because it disturbed the statistical equilibrium. I closed the window with a shield and walked around the lobby. The lobby was damp, dark and noisy.
The building of the institute was generally quite ancient, but it began to be built, apparently, from the lobby. In moldy corners the bones of chained skeletons shimmered whitishly, somewhere water dripped
statues in rusty armor were sticking out in unnatural poses between the columns, to the right of the entrance at
fragments of ancient idols were piled up on the walls, plaster legs in boots stuck out at the top of this pile. WITH
blackened portraits under the ceiling, venerable elders looked sternly, their faces were seen
familiar features of Fyodor Simeonovich, comrade Gian Giacomo and other masters. All this archaic rubbish should have been thrown away a long time ago, cut through the walls of the window and install pipes
daylight, but everything was credited, inventoried and personally by Modest Matveyevich to
waste is prohibited.On the capitals of the columns and in the labyrinths of the colossal chandelier hanging from the blackened ceiling, bats and flying dogs rustled. Modest Matveyevich fought with them. He watered them with turpentine and creosote, dusted them with dust, sprayed them with hexachlorane, they died by the thousands, but were reborn by the tens of thousands. They mutated, singing and talking strains appeared among them,
the descendants of the most ancient genera now ate exclusively pyrethrum mixed with chlorophos, and the institute projectionist Sanya Drozd swore that he had seen it here once with his own eyes
a bat, like two peas in a pod, resembling a comrade in charge.
In a deep niche, from which an icy stench was drawn, someone groaned and rattled chains. "You
stop it,” I said sternly. - What a mystic! How embarrassing!..” The niche fell silent. I rearranged the stray carpet and climbed the stairs.
As you know, from the outside, the institute looked like a two-story building. In fact, it contained at least
twelve floors. Above the twelfth, I just never went up, because the elevator is constantly
repaired, but I still did not know how to fly. The ten-window façade, like most façades, was also an optical illusion. To the right and left of the lobby, the Institute extended at least a kilometer, and
nevertheless, decisively all the windows faced the same crooked street and the same storehouse.
This struck me in an extraordinary way. At first, I pestered Oire-Oira so that he would explain to me how
this is compatible with classical or at least with relativistic ideas about the properties of space. I didn’t understand anything from the explanations, but gradually I got used to it and stopped being surprised. I am absolutely convinced that in ten or fifteen years any student will have a better understanding of the general
theory of relativity than a modern specialist. To do this, it is not at all necessary to understand how the curvature of space-time occurs, it is only necessary that such an idea from childhood
went into everyday life and became habitual.
The entire first floor was occupied by the Linear Happiness department. Here was the kingdom of Fyodor Simeonovich, here it smelled of apples and coniferous forests, the prettiest girls and the nicest guys worked here. There were no gloomy fanatics, experts and adepts of black magic, no one here
did not tear, hissing and grimacing in pain, out of his hair, no one muttered spells that looked like indecent tongue twisters, did not boil alive toads and crows at midnight, on a full moon, on Ivan Kupala,
unlucky numbers. Here they worked on optimism. Here they did everything possible within the framework of white,
submolecular and infraneuronal magic to increase the spiritual tone of each individual
individual and entire human groups. Here they condensed and distributed around the world
cheerful, harmless laughter; developed, tested and implemented models of behaviors and attitudes,
strengthening friendship and destroying strife; sublimated and sublimated extracts of heat relievers,
not containing a single molecule of alcohol and other drugs. Now they were preparing for the field
testing a portable universal pester and developing new brands of the rarest
alloys of mind and kindness.
I unlocked the door of the central hall and, standing on the threshold, admired how the giant
distiller of Children's Laughter, somewhat similar to the Van de Graaff generator. Only, unlike the generator, it worked completely silently and smelled good around it. According to the instructions, I had to
turn the two large white switches on the remote control to turn off the golden glow in the hall to
it became dark, cold and motionless - in short, the instructions demanded that I de-energize this production room. But I didn't even hesitate, I backed out into the corridor and locked the door behind me. It seemed to me to de-energize anything in the laboratories of Fyodor Simeonovich
just blasphemy.
I slowly walked down the corridor, looking at the funny pictures on the doors of the laboratories, and on
In the corner I met a brownie Tikhon, who drew and changed these pictures every night. We exchanged
handshake. Tikhon was a nice gray little house elf from the Ryazan region, exiled by Viy to Solovets for some kind of offense: he didn’t say hello to someone there or refused to eat a boiled viper ... Fyodor Simeonovich welcomed him, washed him, cured him of chronic alcoholism, and he lived here on the first floor. He drew superbly, in the style of Bidstrup, and was famous among the locals.
brownies with prudence and sober behavior.
I already wanted to go up to the second floor, but I remembered the vivarium and went to the basement. The overseer of the vivarium, an elderly rehabilitated ghoul Alfred, was drinking tea. When he saw me he tried
hide the teapot under the table, broke the glass, blushed and looked down. I felt sorry for him.
“Happy coming,” I said, pretending not to notice anything.
He cleared his throat, covered his mouth with his hand, and answered hoarsely:
- Thank you. And you too.
- Everything is fine? I asked, looking around the rows of cages and stalls.
“Briareus broke his finger,” said Alfred.
- How so?
- Yes, it is. On the eighteenth right hand. He picked his nose, turned awkwardly - they are clumsy, hecatoncheirs - and broke it.
“So you need a vet,” I said.
- It will work! What is it for him, for the first time, or something ...
“No, that’s not possible,” I said. - Let's go see.
We went into the depths of the vivarium past the Little Humpbacked Horse, dozing with his face in a bag of oats, past
an aviary with harpies, guiding us with sleepy eyes, past the cage with the Lernean hydra,
gloomy and taciturn at this time of the year ... Hecatoncheirs, hundred-armed and fifty-headed twin brothers, the first-born of Heaven and Earth, were placed in a vast concrete cave, taken
thick iron bars. Gies and Kott slept, curled up in huge ugly bundles, from which protruded blue shaved heads with closed eyes and hairy, relaxed hands. Briareus
toiled. He squatted, pressed against the grate, and, putting his hand with a sore finger into the passage, held her family with his other hands. With the other ninety-two hands he held on to
rods and propped up their heads. Some of the heads were asleep.
- What? I said pitifully. - Hurts?
The waking heads murmured in Hellenic and woke up one head that knew Russian.
“Passion hurts,” she said. The others fell silent and stared at me with their mouths open.
I examined my finger. The finger was dirty and swollen, and it wasn't broken at all. He was just
dislocated. In our gym, such injuries were cured without any doctor. I grabbed my finger and
pulled him on himself with all his strength. Briareus roared with all fifty throats and fell on
back.
“Well, well, well,” I said, wiping my hands with a handkerchief. - It's all, it's all...
Briareus, squelching his nose, began to examine the finger. Hind heads greedily pulled their necks and
they impatiently nibbled on the front ears so that they would not cover them. Alfred grinned.
“It would be good for him to bleed,” he said with a long-forgotten expression, then sighed and
added: - Yes, only what kind of blood is in him - only one appearance. One word - undead.
Briares got up. All fifty heads smiled blissfully. I waved to him and walked back. I lingered near Koshchei the Deathless. The great villain lived in a comfortable separate cell with carpets, air conditioning and bookcases. On the walls of the cage were hung portraits of Genghis Khan, Himmler, Catherine de Medici, one of the Borgias, and
Goldwater or McCarthy. Koschei himself, in a shimmering dressing gown, stood cross-legged in front of a huge
music stand and read an offset copy of The Hammer of the Witches. At the same time, he made unpleasant movements with his long fingers: either he screwed something up, or he stuck something in, or he ripped off something. He was kept in
endless pre-trial detention while an endless investigation into the case of his endless crimes was conducted. At the institute, they valued him very much, since along the way he was used for some unique experiments and as an interpreter when communicating with Zmey Gorynych. (Z. Gorynych himself was locked in an old boiler room, from where he could hear his metallic snoring and roaring
awake.) I stood and thought that if somewhere in a point infinitely distant from us
time of Koshchei and sentenced, then the judges, whoever they are, will find themselves in a very strange position:
it is impossible to apply the death penalty to an immortal criminal, and eternal imprisonment, if
take into account the preliminary, he has already departed ...
Then they grabbed me by the trouser leg, and a drunken voice said:
- Well, urki, with whom for three?
I managed to escape. Three ghouls in a neighboring enclosure looked at me greedily, pressing
gray muzzles to a metal grid through which a current of two hundred volts was passed.
- He crushed his hand, bespectacled dylda! one said.
“Don’t take it,” I said. - Do you want aspens?
Alfred ran up, cracking his whip, and the ghouls retired to a dark corner, where they immediately began cursing badly and slapping homemade cards.
I told Alfred:
- OK then. I think it's all right. I'll go further.
“Good way,” Alfred answered readily.
Climbing the steps, I could hear the kettle rattling and gurgling.
I looked into the machine room and saw how the power generator works. The Institute is independent of
urban energy sources. Instead, after clarifying the principle of determinism, it was decided to use the well-known Wheel of Fortune as a source of free mechanical energy.
Above the cement floor of the hall rose only a small patch of gleaming polished
the rims of a gigantic wheel whose axis of rotation lay somewhere in infinity, making the rim look like just a conveyor belt coming out of one wall and into another. At one time it was
it is fashionable to defend dissertations on refining the radius of curvature of the Wheel of Fortune, but since all these
dissertations gave results with extremely low accuracy, up to ten megaparsecs, Academic Council
Institute decided to stop consideration of dissertations on this topic until
the time when the creation of transgalactic means of communication will allow us to count on a significant increase in accuracy.
Several imps from the attendants were playing at the Wheel - jumping on the rim, driving to the wall, jumping off and rushing back. I strongly called them to order. “You stop this,” I said, “this is not a farce for you.” They hid behind the casings of the transformers and began to fire at me from there with chewed paper. I decided not to mess with milksops, walked along
consoles and, making sure that everything is in order, went up to the second floor.
It was quiet, dark and dusty here. At the low, half-open door dozing, leaning on a long flintlock gun, was an old decrepit soldier in the uniform of the Preobrazhensky regiment and in a cocked hat. Here
housed the Department of Defense Magic, among whose employees there had not been a single living soul for a long time. All our old people, with the possible exception of Fyodor Simeonovich, at one time paid tribute to their passion for this section of magic. Ben Bezalel successfully used the Golem at palace
coups: a clay monster, indifferent to bribery and invulnerable to poisons, guarded the laboratories, and at the same time the imperial treasury. Giuseppe Balsamo created the first broomstick squadron in history, which performed well on the battlefields of the Hundred Years War. But the squadron fell apart rather quickly: some of the witches got married, and the rest tagged along
Reiter regiments as candidates. King Solomon captured and charmed a dozen dozen
ifrits and made a separate anti-elephant flamethrower battalion from them. The young Cristobal Junta brought to the retinue of Charlemagne a Chinese coached on the Moors
dragon, but, having learned that the emperor was going to fight not with the Moors, but with the Basques, he became furious and deserted. Throughout the centuries-old history of wars, various magicians suggested using vampires in battle (for night reconnaissance in battle), basilisks (to defeat the enemy with horror
to complete fossilization), flying carpets (for dropping sewage on enemy cities),
treasurer swords of various merits (to compensate for the small number) and much more. However
already after the First World War, after Long Bertha, tanks, mustard gas and chlorine, defensive magic
started to wither. A general flight of employees began from the department. The longest lingering there was a certain Pitirim Schwartz, a former monk and inventor of a prop for a musket, who worked selflessly
over the genie bombing project. The essence of the project was to drop enemy cities
bottles with genies kept in captivity for at least three thousand years. It is well known that
jinn in a free state are only capable of either destroying cities or building palaces. A thoroughly seasoned genie (Pitirim Schwartz reasoned), having been freed from the bottle, will not
build palaces, and the enemy will have a hard time. Some obstacle to the implementation of this plan was the insufficient number of bottles with genies, but Schwartz expected to replenish
reserves by deep trawling of the Red and Mediterranean seas. They say that, having learned about the hydrogen
bomb and bacteriological warfare, old Pitirim lost his peace of mind, distributed the genies he had to departments and went to investigate the meaning of life to Cristobal Junta. Nobody ever saw him again.
When I stopped on the threshold, the soldier looked at me with one eye, croaked: “It is not ordered, go on…” and dozed off again. I looked around the empty cluttered room with the rubble
outlandish models and scraps of illiterate drawings, moved the toe of his boot
at the entrance there is a folder with a greased signature stamp “Top Secret. Burn before reading" and went
away. There was nothing to de-energize here, and as for spontaneous combustion, everything that could spontaneously ignite spontaneously ignited here many years ago.
The book depository was located on the same floor. It was a dark, dusty room.
to match the lobby, but much more extensive. Regarding its size, it was said that in
in the depths, half a kilometer from the entrance, a good highway runs along the racks, equipped with miles
pillars. Oira-Oira reached the mark of "19", and the stubborn Vitka Korneev, in search of a technical
documentation for a sofa-translator, I got hold of seven-league boots and ran up to the mark "124". He
he would have moved further, but a brigade of Danaids in padded jackets and with jackhammers blocked his path. Under the supervision of the fat-faced Cain, they broke up the asphalt and laid some kind of
pipes. The Scientific Council has repeatedly raised the issue of building a high-voltage line along the highway to transfer storage subscribers by wire, but all positive proposals have come up against a lack of funds.
The vault was chock-full of the most interesting books in every language of the world and history, from
Atlantean language up to and including pidgin English. But I was most interested in the multi-volume edition of the Book of Fates. The Book of Fates was printed in petite on the finest rice paper and contained, in chronological order, more or less complete data on 73,619,024,511 people.
reasonable. The first volume began with Pithecanthropus Ayuykhkh. (“Born 2 Aug. 965 543 BC, d. 13 Jan.
965 522 BC e. Ramapithecus parents. Ramapitek's wife. Children: male Ad-Amm, female E-Wa. Nomadic
with the Ramapithecus tribe in Araratsk. valleys. Eat, drink, sleep to your heart's content. Drilled the first hole in
stone. Cave devoured. bear during the hunt.") The latest in the last volume of the regular edition, published last year, was Francisco-Cayetano-Augustín-Lucía-i-Manuel-i-Josefa-i-Miguel-Luca-Carlos-Pedro Trinidad. (“Born July 16, 1491 AD, d. July 17, 1491 AD.
Parents: Pedro-Carlos-Luca-Miguel-y-Josefa-y-Manuel-y-Lucia-Augustin-Cayetano-Francisco
Trinidad and Maria Trinidad (see). Portuguese. Anacephalic. Commander of the Order of the Holy Spirit, Colonel
guards.)
From the imprint it was clear that the Book of Fates was published in 1 (one) copy and
this last volume was signed for publication during the flights of the Montgolfier brothers. Apparently for that
in order to somehow satisfy the needs of contemporaries, the publishing house undertook the publication
urgent irregular issues, in which only the years of birth and years of death were listed. In one of these issues, I found my name. However, because of the haste, many typographical errors crept into these editions, and I learned with amazement that I would die in 1611. In the eight-volume edition, there are up to
My last name hasn't arrived yet.
The publication of the Book of Fates was advised by a special group in the department of Predictions and Prophecies. The department was run-down, neglected, it could not recover from the short reign of Sir Citizen Merlin, and the institute repeatedly announced a competition for the vacant position of the head of the department, and each time only one person applied for the competition - Merlin himself.
The Academic Council conscientiously considered the application and successfully failed it - forty
three votes "against" with one "for". (Merlin, by tradition, was also a member of the Academic Council.)
The Department of Divination and Prophecy occupied the entire third floor. I walked along the doors with signs "Coffee Grounds Group", "Augur Group", "Pythian Group", "Synoptic Group",
"Solitaire Group", "Solovki Oracle". I didn’t have to de-energize anything, because the department
worked by candlelight. A fresh inscription in chalk has already appeared on the doors of the synoptic group: “It is dark
water in the clouds." Every morning Merlin, cursing the intrigues of envious people, erased this inscription with a wet
with a rag, and every night it was renewed. In general, what was the authority of the department based on, I had
completely incomprehensible. From time to time, employees gave reports on strange topics, such as:
"Regarding the Expression of the Augur's Eyes" or "The Predictive Properties of the Mocha Grounds of the 1926 Harvest". Sometimes a group of Pythians managed to predict something correctly, but each time
the Pythians seemed so surprised and frightened by their success that the whole effect was wasted. U-Janus, a most delicate person, could not, as was repeatedly noted, hold back an indefinite smile every time he was present at the meetings of the seminar of Pythia and augurs.
On the fourth floor, I finally found a job: I turned off the light in the cells of the Department of Eternal Youth. There were no young people in the department, and these old people, suffering from millennial sclerosis, constantly forgot to turn off the light behind them. However, I suspect that this was not only a matter of sclerosis.
Many of them were still afraid that they would be electrocuted. They still called the electric train a cast iron.
In the sublimation laboratory, between long tables, she wandered, yawning, - hands in pockets, - sad
model of an ever-young youth. Her two-meter gray beard dragged along the floor and clung to the legs of chairs. Just in case, I put the bottle of aqua regia on the stool in the closet and went to my electronics room.
Here was my Aldan. I admired him a little, how compact, beautiful he is,
mysteriously gleaming. At the institute, we were treated differently. Accounting, for example
greeted me with open arms, and the chief accountant, smiling stingily, immediately overwhelmed me with tedious calculations of wages and profitability. Gian Giacomo, manager
Department of Universal Transformations, at first he was also delighted, but, making sure that "Aldan" did not
is able to calculate even the elementary transformation of a cube of lead into a cube of gold, cooled to
my electronics and only honored us with occasional random assignments. But I couldn’t save him from his subordinate and beloved student Vitka Korneev. And Oira-Oira always sat on my neck
with their furious tasks from the field of irrational metamathematics. Cristobal
The junta, who liked to be the first in everything, made it a rule to connect the car to his central nervous system at night, so that the next day something was clearly buzzing and clicking in his head, and the confused Aldan, instead of in order to count in the binary system, in an incomprehensible way to me, he switched to the ancient sexagesimal, and even changed the logic, completely denying
principle of the excluded middle. Fedor Simeonovich Kivrin played with the car like a child
with a toy. He could play even-odd with her for hours, taught her Japanese chess, and in order to be
more interesting, instilled into the car someone's immortal soul - however, quite cheerful and hardworking. Janus Poluektovich (I don't remember, A or U) used the car only once. He
brought with him a small translucent box, which he connected to the Aldan. After about ten seconds of working with this prefix, all the fuses flew in the car, after which
Janus Poluektovich apologized, took his box and left.
But, despite all the little hindrances and troubles, despite the fact that the now animated “Aldan” sometimes printed on the output: “I think. Please do not interfere, ”despite the lack of spare blocks and the feeling of helplessness that seized me when it was necessary to produce
logical analysis of "incongruent transgression in the psi-field of the incubus transformation", despite
all this, it was extremely interesting to work here, and I was proud of my obvious need. I
carried out all the calculations in Oira-Oira's work on the mechanism of heredity in bipolar homunculi.
I made tables for Vitka Korneev of the strength of the M-field of the sofa-translator in the nine-dimensional magic space. I kept a working calculation for a sponsored fish factory. I calculated the diagram
for the most economical transportation of the elixir of Children's Laughter. I even calculated the probabilities of solving the Big Elephant, State Duma and Napoleon's Tomb solitaire games for the amusing people from the solitaire group and did all the quadratures of the numerical method of Cristobal Hozevich, for
that he taught me to fall into nirvana. I was content, I didn't have enough days, and my life was full
meaning.
It was still early, only seven o'clock. I turned on Aldan and did some work. At nine o'clock
In the evening I came to my senses, regretfully de-energized the electronic room and went to the fifth floor. Blizzard
everything did not subside. It was a real Christmas storm. She howled and squealed in the old abandoned
chimneys, she swept snowdrifts under the windows, frantically pulled and swayed the rare street lamps.I passed the territory of the administrative department. Entrance to the reception of Modest
Matveyevich was laid crosswise with I-beams of iron beams, and on the sides, sabers drawn, were two hefty ifrits in turbans and in full combat gear. Everyone's nose
red and swollen from a cold, was pierced by a massive gold ring with a tin inventory number. There was a smell of gray, singed wool and streptocide ointment all around. I lingered on
for a while, considering them, because ifrits are rare creatures in our latitudes. But the one
who was standing on the right, unshaven and with a black patch over his eye, began to eat me with his eye. There was a bad reputation about him, as if he were a former cannibal, and I hastily moved on. I could hear him sniffling and smacking his lips behind my back.
In the premises of the Department of Absolute Knowledge, all the windows were open, because the smell of Professor Vibegalla's herring heads seeped through here. On the window sills, under the batteries
steam heating darkened puddles. I closed the windows and walked between the pristine hundred
lamy employees of the department. On the tables were brand new ink devices that did not know ink,
cigarette butts protruded from inkwells. It was a strange department. Their slogan was: "The knowledge of infinity requires infinite time." I did not argue with this, but they made an unexpected
conclusion: "Therefore, work do not work - everything is one." And in the interest of not increasing the entropy of the universe
they didn't work. At least most of them. "An masses," as Vibegallo would say. In fact, their task was reduced to the analysis of the curve of relative knowledge in the area of ​​its asymptotic
approach to absolute truth. Therefore, some employees all the time were engaged in the division of zero
to zero on desktop "Mercedes", while others were asked to leave on business trips to infinity. From
business trips, they returned vigorous, well-fed and immediately took a vacation for health reasons. IN
between business trips, they went from department to department, sat down with smoking
cigarettes on the desktops and told jokes about the disclosure of uncertainties by the method
Lopital. They were easily recognized by their blank eyes and scratched ears from constant shaving. Behind
half a year of my stay at the institute, they gave "Aldan" only one task, which boiled down to everything
besides, the division of zero by zero did not contain any absolute truth. Maybe one of them was doing the real thing, but I didn't know anything about it.
At half past ten I entered the floor of Amvrosy Ambruazovich Vybegalla. covering up
face with a handkerchief and trying to breathe through my mouth, I headed straight for the laboratory known
among employees as "Maternity Hospital". Here, according to Professor Vibegalla, were born
in flasks of a model of an ideal person. Hatched, that is. Comprene wu?7
The laboratory was stuffy and dark. I turned on the light. Grey, smooth walls lit up, decorated with portraits of Aesculapius, Paracelsus, and Ambrosius Ambruazovich himself. Amvrosy Ambruazovich was depicted in a black cap with noble curls, and some kind of medal shone illegibly on his chest. Some kind of portrait once also hung on the fourth wall, but now it remains
only a dark square and three rusty bent nails.
There was an autoclave in the center of the lab, and another, larger one in the corner. Near the central autoclave, loaves of bread lay right on the floor, there were galvanized buckets with a bluish back and a huge vat of steamed bran. Judging by the smell, there were herring heads somewhere nearby,
but I still couldn't figure out where. Silence reigned in the laboratory, rhythmic clicking sounds coming from the depths of the autoclave.7Do you understand? (French)
For some reason, on tiptoe, I approached the central autoclave and looked into the viewing window. I was already nauseated by the smell, but then I felt really bad, although I didn’t see anything special: something white and shapeless was slowly swaying in the greenish twilight. I turned off the light
went out and carefully closed the door. “According to his tinsel,” I remembered. I had vague premonitions. Only now did I notice that around the threshold there was a thick magical line, painted with clumsy Kabbalistic signs. Looking closer, I realized that it was a spell against the gaki - the hungry demon of hell.
With some relief, I left Vibegalla's domain and began to climb to the sixth floor,
where Gian Giacomo and his collaborators were engaged in the theory and practice of Universal Transformations.
A colorful verse poster hung on the landing calling for the creation of a public library. The idea belonged to the local committee, the poems were mine:
Dig up your cellars
And shake the cabinets
Various books and magazines
Carry if possible.
I blushed and moved on. Entering the sixth floor, I immediately saw that Vitkina's door
laboratory ajar, and heard a hoarse singing. I crept up to the door.Chapter Three
I want to glorify youyou breaking through
through a snowstorm on a winter evening.
Your strong breath and
the rhythmic beating of your heart...
W. WhitmanJust now, Vitka said that he was going to one company, and left a double to work in the laboratory.
Double is a very interesting thing. As a rule, this is a fairly exact copy of its creator. Let's say, a man lacks hands - he creates a double for himself, brainless, unresponsive, who can only,
what to solder contacts, or carry weights, or write from dictation, but who already knows how to do it
Fine. Or a person needs an anthropoid model for some experiment - he creates for himself
double, brainless, unresponsive, only able to walk on the ceiling or receive telepathy, but already able to do it well. Or the simplest case. Let's say a person is going to receive a salary, but he does not want to waste time, and he sends his double instead of himself, only
who knows how not to let anyone through without a queue, sign the statement and count the money, not
leaving the checkout. Of course, not everyone knows how to create duplicates. For example, I haven't been able to yet. What I have
while it turned out, nothing was skillful - even to walk. And here you are standing, it used to be, in line, it seems to be here and
Vitka, and Roman, and Volodya Pochkin, but there is no one to talk to. They stand like stone, do not blink, do not breathe,
they do not shift from foot to foot, and there is no one to ask for a cigarette.
Real masters can create very complex, multiprogrammed, self-learning
duplicates. Roman sent such a superman in the summer instead of me by car. And none of my guys
figured it wasn't me. My “Moskvich” superbly led the double, cursed when mosquitoes bit him, and sang in chorus with pleasure. Returning to Leningrad, he drove everyone home, on his own
rented a rental car, paid and immediately disappeared right in front of the stunned director
rental.
At one time I thought that A-Janus and U-Janus were a double and an original. However, this was not at all
So. First of all, both directors had passports, diplomas, passes and other necessary documents. The most difficult doubles could not have any identity cards. At the sight of a state seal on their photograph, they became furious and immediately tore the documents to shreds.
This mysterious property of doubles was studied by Magnus Redkin for a long time, but the task turned out to be obvious to him.
unable to.
Further, the Januses were protein creatures. Regarding duplicates, the dispute between philosophers and cyberneticists has not yet stopped: to consider them alive or not. Most takes
were organosilicon structures, there were doubles on a germanium basis, and recently doubles on aluminopolymers have come into fashion.
And finally, the most important thing is that no one has ever created artificially either A-Janus or U-Janus.
They were not a copy and the original, they were not twin brothers, they were one person.
- Janus Poluektovich Nevstruev. No one at the institute understood this, but everyone knew it so firmly that they did not even try to understand it.
Vitkin's double stood, resting his palms on the laboratory table, and fixed his gaze
supervised the work of Ashby's small homeostat. At the same time, he hummed a song to a once popular motive:
We are not Descartes, we are not Newtons,
For us, science is a dark forest
Miracles.
And we are normal astronomers - yes!
Grab the stars from heaven...
I've never heard doubles sing before. But one could expect from Vitka's double
Total. I remember one Vitka double, who dared to quarrel about the immoderate expenditure of psycho-energy with Modest Matveyevich himself. But even the stuffed animals I created without arms, without legs were afraid of Modest Matveyevich to the point of convulsions, apparently instinctively.
To the right of the double, in the corner, stood under a canvas cover a two-way translator TDH-80E,
unprofitable product of the Kitezhgrad plant of magic equipment. Next to the laboratory table, in the light of three
reflectors, my old acquaintance, the sofa, shone with darned leather. A baby bathtub filled with water was placed on the sofa, and a dead perch was swimming belly up in the bathtub. Even in the laboratory there were racks,
cluttered with instruments, and near the door stood a large, green-glass, quarter-sized bottle covered with dust. There was a sealed genie in the bottle, you could see how he was moving there,
sparkling eyes.
Vitkin's double stopped examining the homeostat, sat down on the sofa next to the bathroom, and, staring at the
with a petrified look at the dead fish, he sang the following verse:
For the purpose of nature's curbing,
In order to dispel ignorance
darkness
We take a picture of the universe - yes!
And stupidly look what's what ...
The perch remained unchanged. Then the double stuck his hand deep into the sofa and began, sniffling,
something hard to turn.
The sofa was a translator. He created an M-field around him, transforming, to put it simply, real reality into fabulous reality. I experienced it myself on a memorable night on
bread at Naina Kievna's, and the only thing that saved me then was that the sofa worked at a quarter of its strength, on dark currents, otherwise I would have woken up some kind of boy-with-a-toe in boots. For Magnus
Redkin's sofa was a possible receptacle for the desired White Thesis. For Modest Matveyevich -
museum exhibit inventory number 1123, prohibited for squandering. For Vitka it is
was the number one tool. Therefore, Vitka stole the sofa every night, Magnus Fedorovich, out of jealousy, reported this to comrade Demin, and Modest Matveyevich’s activity was reduced to
to stop all this. Vitka stole the sofa until Janus Poluektovich intervened,
who, in close cooperation with Fedor Simeonovich and with the active support of Gian
Giacomo, relying on an official letter from the Presidium of the Academy of Sciences with the personal signatures of four academicians, managed to completely neutralize Redkin and slightly push Modest Matveevich out of his positions.
Modest Matveyevich announced that he, as a financially responsible person, does not want anything
hear and what he wants, so that the sofa inventory number 1123 is in a specially designated
for him, sofa, room. And if this does not happen, said Modest Matveyevich menacingly, then let everyone
up to and including academicians, blame themselves. Janus Poluektovich agreed to blame himself, Fedor
Simeonovich too, and Vitka quickly dragged the sofa to his laboratory. Vitka was a serious worker, not like the rogues from the Department of Absolute Knowledge, and he intended to turn all the sea and ocean water of our planet into living water. While he, however, was in the experimental stage.
The perch in the tub stirred and rolled over belly down. Double removed his hand from the couch. Perch
he moved his fins apathetically, yawned, fell on his side and rolled over onto his back again.
"S-beast," the double said with expression.
I immediately got worried. It was said emotionally. No lab double could
would say so. Double put his hands in his pockets, slowly got up and saw me. Few seconds
we looked at each other. Then I sarcastically inquired:
- Do we work?
Double looked at me blankly.
“Come on, come on,” I said. - All clear.
The double was silent. He stood like a stone and did not blink.
“Well, here it is,” I said. - It's half past ten. I'll give you ten minutes. Take it all away
throw away this dead thing and run to dance. And I'll de-energize myself.
Double pursed his lips and began to back away. He backed away very cautiously, rounded the sofa and
stood up so that there was a laboratory table between us. I defiantly looked at my watch. Double
muttered a spell, a Mercedes appeared on the table, a fountain pen and a stack of clean paper. Double,
bending his knees, hung in the air and began to write something, looking at me warily from time to time.
It was very similar, and I even hesitated. However, I had a sure means to find out
the truth. Doubles are usually completely insensitive to pain. Fumbling in my pocket, I took out small sharp pincers and, clicking them expressively, began to approach the double. Double stopped
write. Looking into his eyes, I bit the head of a nail sticking out of the table with tongs, and
said:
- N-n-well?
- What are you doing to me? Vitka inquired. You can see that the man is working.
"You're a double," I said. - Don't you dare talk to me.
“Put the pincers away,” he said.
“Don’t be a fool,” I said. - I also have a double.
Vitka sat down on the edge of the table and wearily rubbed his ears.
“I can’t do anything today,” he said. - I'm a fool today. He created a double - it turned out to be some kind of completely brainless. I dropped everything, I sat on the umklidet, an animal ... I cracked
his neck, beat off his arm ... And the perch dies systematically.
I went to the sofa and looked into the bath.
- And what happened to him?
- How do I know?
- Where did you get it?
- On the market.
I picked up the perch by the tail.
- And what do you want? Common snuggle fish.
“Cudgel,” said Vitka. - Water is alive...
“Ah,” I said, and began to think about what to advise him. Mechanism of action of living water
imagined very vaguely. Mostly based on the tale of Ivan Tsarevich and the Gray Wolf.
The genie in the bottle moved and from time to time began to wipe the glass, dusty outside, with his palm.
“I’d wipe the bottle,” I said, without inventing anything.
- What?
- Wipe the dust off the bottle. He is bored there.
“To hell with him, let him be bored,” Vitka said absently. He thrust his hand into the sofa again and again
checked something. Perch revived.
- Did you see it? Vitka said. - When I give the maximum voltage - everything is in order.
“The copy is bad,” I said at random.
Vitka took his hand out of the sofa and stared at me.
“Instance…” he said. “Unsuccessful…” His eyes became like those of a double. – Instance to instance lupus est…8
“Then he’ll probably have ice cream,” I said, growing bolder.
Vitka did not listen to me.
- Where can I get fish? he said, looking around and patting his pockets. - A fish would ...
- For what? I asked.
"That's right," Vitka said. - For what? Since there is no other fish,” he said judiciously, “why
would not take another water? Right?
“Uh, no,” I objected. - This will not work.
- But as? Vitka asked eagerly.
“Get out of here,” I said. - Leave the room.
- Where?
- Wherever you want.
He climbed over the couch and grabbed my breasts.
“Listen to me, understand? he said menacingly. “Nothing is the same in the world. Everything is distributed according to the Gaussian. Water is different for water… This old fool did not realize that there is a dispersion of properties…
"Hey, honey," I called him. - New Year is coming soon! Don't get so carried away.
He released me and fussed:
- Where did I put it? .. Here is a bast shoe! .. Where did I put it? .. Ah, here it is ...
He rushed to the chair on which the umclidet stood upright. The same one. I jumped to the door and
said pleadingly:
- Come to your senses! The twelfth hour! They are waiting for you! Verochka is waiting!
“No,” he answered. I sent them a double. Good take, spreading ... Fool fool.
Jokes, makes a stand, dances like an ox ...
He twirled the umklidet in his hands, figuring something out, trying it on, screwing up one eye.
Get out, they tell you! I yelled in despair.
8A paraphrase of the Latin proverb "man is a wolf to man".
Vitka glanced at me briefly, and I sat down. The jokes are over. Vitka was in a state where magicians, carried away by their work, turn those around them into spiders, wood lice, lizards and others.
quiet animals. I squatted down next to the genie and watched.
Vitka froze in the classic pose for a material spell (position "martihor"), over
pink steam rose from the table, shadows like bats jumped up and down, the Mercedes disappeared, paper disappeared, and suddenly the entire surface of the table was covered with vessels with transparent solutions. Vitka, without looking, put the umklidet on a chair, grabbed one of the vessels and began to examine it carefully. It was clear that now he would never leave here and never leave. He quickly removed from the sofa
bathtub, jumped up to the racks in one leap and dragged a bulky copper aquameter to the table.
I made myself comfortable and wiped the genie's viewing window, but then voices came from the corridor, the clatter of feet and the slamming of doors. I jumped up and rushed out of the laboratory.
The feeling of night emptiness and the dark peace of the huge building disappeared without a trace. In the corridor
bright lights were on. Someone ran headlong up the stairs, someone shouted: “Valka! Voltage
fell! Run to the battery room!”, someone was shaking out a fur coat on the landing, and sleet
flew in all directions. With a pensive face, a gracefully curved Zhian quickly walked towards me.
Giacomo, behind him, with his huge briefcase under his arm and with his cane in his teeth, trotted the dwarf. We
bowed. The great prestidigitator smelled of good wine and French incense.
I did not dare to stop him, and he went through the locked door into his office. The gnome slipped him
followed by a briefcase and a cane, and he himself dived into a steam heating battery.
- What the devil? I screamed and ran up the stairs.
The institute was packed with staff. There seemed to be even more of them than on a weekday.
In the offices and laboratories, the lights were burning with might and main, the doors were wide open. At the institute stood
the usual business rumble: the crackle of discharges, monotonous voices dictating numbers and casting spells, the fractional knock of Mercedes and Rheinmetals. And above all this, the rolling and victorious roar of Fyodor Simeonovich: “It's good, it's great! You are great, my dear! But w-what
the fool turned off the g-generator?" I was hit in the back with a hard corner, and I grabbed the railing. I
furious. They were Volodya Pochkin and Edik Amperian, they were dragging a coordinate measuring machine weighing half a ton to their floor.
“Ah, Sasha,” Edik said affably. - Hello, Sasha.
Sasha, get out of the way! shouted Volodya Pochkin, backing away. - Bring it in, bring it in!
I grabbed him by the collar:
Why are you at the institute? How did you get here?
"Through the door, through the door, let me in..." Volodya said. - Edka, even more to the right! You see that it's not
passes?
I let him go and rushed into the lobby. I was seized with administrative indignation. "I
I’ll show you,” I muttered, jumping over the four steps. - I'll show you to mess around. I'll show you to let everyone indiscriminately!" Macrodemons Entry and Exit, instead of doing business,
trembling with excitement and feverishly phosphorescent, they played roulette. Forgotten before my eyes
Duty Entrance broke the bank of about seventy billion molecules from the Duty-Forgotten Exit. Roulette I recognized immediately. This was my roll. I made it myself for a party
and kept it behind a cabinet in the electronic room, and only Vitka Korneev knew about it. conspiracy, decided
I. I'll smash everyone. And through the lobby, covered with snow, red-faced cheerful employees kept walking and walking.
- Well, it's sweeping! All ears clogged ...
- Did you leave too?
- Well, boring things ... Everyone got drunk. Let me think, I'll go and work better. Left them a double and
gone…
- You know, I dance with her and feel that I am overgrown with wool. Enough vodka - does not help ...
– What about a beam of electrons? Is the mass large? Well, then photons ...
– Alexei, do you have a free laser? Well, let's at least gas ...
- Jackdaw, how did you leave your husband?
“I left an hour ago, if you want to know. In a snowdrift, you know, failed, almost skidded
me…
I realized that I didn't. There was no longer any point in taking the roulette wheel away from the demons, there was only
go and quarrel to smithereens with the provocateur Vitka, and then come what may. I threatened the demons
fist and wandered up the stairs, trying to imagine what would happen if the institute
Now Modest Matveyevich looked in.
On the way to the director's office, I stopped in the poster room. Here, a genie released from a bottle was pacified. The genie, huge, blue with anger, rushed about in the enclosure, fenced with shields.
Jian ben Jian and closed from above by a powerful magnetic field. The genie was whipped with high voltage
discharges, he howled, swore in several dead languages, galloped, belched out tongues of fire, in vehemence he began to build and immediately destroyed palaces, then, finally, gave up, sat down on the floor and, trembling
from discharges, howled plaintively:
- Well, enough, well, leave me alone, well, I won’t do it anymore ... Oh-yoy-yoy ... Well, I’m already quite quiet ...
Calm, unblinking young people stood at the discharger console, all doubles. Originals
but, crowding around the shaker, they glanced at their watches and uncorked bottles.
I approached them.
- Ah, Sasha!
- Sashencia, they say you are on duty today ... Then I will run into the hall to see you.
- Hey, someone, create a glass for him, my hands are busy ...
I was stunned and did not notice how a glass was in my hand. Corks burst into shields
Jian ben Jian, ice-cold champagne hissed. The discharges stopped, the genie stopped whining and
started sniffing. At that very moment, the Kremlin clock began to strike twelve.
- Guys! Long live Monday!
The glasses have moved. Then someone said, examining the bottle:
Who made wine?
- I.
Don't forget to pay tomorrow.
- Well, another bottle?
- Enough, let's catch a cold.
- A good genie got caught ... A little nervous.
- Gift horse...
- Nothing, it will fly like a cute one. Forty turns will last, and then let him roll with his
nerves.
“Guys,” I said timidly, “it’s night in the yard ... and a holiday. Would you go home...
They looked at me, patted me on the shoulder, they told me: “It’s okay, this will pass,” and they moved in a crowd to the enclosure ... Doubles rolled back one of the shields, and the originals busily surrounded the genie,
firmly took him by the arms and legs and dragged him to the vibration stand. The genie cowardly lamented and uncertainly promised everyone the treasures of the kings of the earth. I stood alone on the sidelines and watched as they fastened his belts and attached microsensors to various parts of his body. Then I touched the shield. He
was huge, heavy, pitted with dents from ball lightning strikes, charred in places.
The shields of Gyan ben Gyan were made from seven dragon skins glued together with the bile of a parricide, and
designed to withstand a direct lightning strike. All shields available at the Institute were confiscated in their
time from the treasury of the Queen of Sheba. This was done not by Cristobal Junta, not by Merlin. Junta
he never talked about it, and Merlin boasted at every opportunity, referring to
dubious authority of King Arthur. Tin inventory numbers were nailed to each shield with wallpaper studs. Theoretically, on the front side of the shields there should have been images of all the famous battles of the past, and on the inside - all the great battles of the future. Practically
on the front side of the shield in front of which I stood, one could see something like a jet plane,
storming the convoy, and the inside was covered with strange stains and resembled
abstract picture.
The genie was shaken on the shaker. He giggled and squealed: “Oh, it tickles! .. Oh, I can’t! ..”
I returned to the corridor. The corridor smelled of sparklers. The crackers were spinning under the ceiling,
knocking on the walls and leaving jets of colored smoke behind them, rockets rushed past. I met a double
Volodya Pochkin dragging a giant incunabula with copper clasps, two takes of Roman
Oira-Oira, languishing under the heavy channel, then Roman himself with a bunch of bright blue
folders from the archives of the Department of Inaccessible Problems, and then a ferocious laboratory assistant from the Department of the Meaning of Life, escorting a herd of swearing ghosts in crusader cloaks for interrogation to the Junta ... All
were busy and busy.
Labor laws were violated viciously and everywhere, and I felt that I had
all desire to fight these violations disappeared, because here at twelve o'clock on New Year's Eve, breaking through the blizzard, people came who were more interested in completing
or start all over again some useful thing, rather than drowning yourself with vodka, senselessly jerking
feet, play forfeits and engage in flirting of varying degrees of ease. People came here who were more pleasant to be with each other than apart, who could not stand any kind of Sunday, because on Sunday they were bored. Magicians, People with a capital letter, and their motto was -
"Monday starts on Saturday." Yes, they knew some spells, they knew how to turn water into
wine, and each of them would not hesitate to feed a thousand people with five loaves. But they are magicians
were not therefore. It was a husk, external. They were magicians because they knew a lot, so
much that quantity has finally turned into quality with them, and they have entered into different relations with the world,
than ordinary people. They worked in an institute that dealt primarily with the problems of human happiness and the meaning of human life, but even among them no one knew exactly what
happiness and what is the meaning of life. And they accepted the working hypothesis that happiness is in continuous
knowledge of the unknown and the meaning of life in the same. Every person is a magician at heart, but he becomes a magician only when he begins to think less about himself and more about others, when it becomes more interesting for him to work than to have fun in the old sense of the word. And probably their working hypothesis
was not far from the truth, because, just as labor turned a monkey into a man, in the same way
the absence of labor in a much shorter time turns a man into a monkey. Even worse than
monkey.
In life, we do not always notice this. The loafer and the parasite, the debauchee and the careerist continue to walk on their hind limbs, speak quite articulately (although the range of topics they narrow down to the limit), and as for tight trousers and passion for jazz, which at one time they tried
determine the degree of ape-likeness, it quickly became clear that they are characteristic even
the best of magicians.
At the institute, it was impossible to hide the regression. The Institute provided unlimited possibilities for turning a person into a magician. But he was merciless to the apostates and marked them without
miss. As soon as the employee indulged in at least an hour of selfish and instinctive actions (and
sometimes even just thoughts), as he noticed with fear that the fluff on his ears was getting thicker.
It was a warning. So the police whistle warns of a possible fine, so the pain
warns of possible injury. Now everything depended on itself. A person all around cannot
fight his sour thoughts, for that he and man are a transitional step from Neanderthal to
mage. But he can act contrary to these thoughts, and then he has chances. And maybe
give in, give up on everything (“We live once”, “We must take everything from life”, “Nothing human
is not alien to me”), and then he has only one thing left: to leave the institute as soon as possible. Out there, he
he can still remain at least a respectable tradesman, honestly but sluggishly earning his salary. But it's hard to decide to leave. The institute is warm and cozy, the work is clean, respected, the pay is good, the people are wonderful, and shame will not eat your eyes out. So they wander, accompanied by sympathetic and disapproving glances, along the corridors and laboratories, with their ears covered
coarse gray hair, stupid, losing the coherence of speech, becoming stupid before our eyes. But these more
one can regret, one can try to help them, one can still hope to restore their human form...
There are others. With empty eyes Reliably knowing which side of the sandwich has butter.
Quite stupid in their own way. In their own way, considerable connoisseurs of human nature. prudent and
unprincipled, knowing the full power of human weaknesses, able to turn any evil into themselves
good and tireless in this. They carefully shave their ears and often invent amazing means to destroy hair. They wear dragon-whisker corsets to hide their curvature of the spine, they wrap themselves in gigantic medieval robes and boyar robes.
fur coats, proclaiming loyalty to the national antiquity. They complain loudly about old
rheumatism, both in winter and summer, they wear high felt boots lined with leather. They are unscrupulous
and patient as spiders. And how often do they achieve significant heights and major successes in their
main business - in the construction of a bright future in one single apartment and on one
a separate personal plot, fenced off from the rest of humanity with live barbed wire ...
I returned to my post in the principal's waiting room, dumped the useless keys in a drawer, and read
a few pages from the classic work of Ya. P. Nevstruev "Equations of Mathematical Magic". This
the book read like an adventure novel because it was crammed full of posed and unresolved problems. I felt a burning desire to work, and I had already decided to give up on duty and go to my Aldan, when Modest Matveyevich called.
Chewing crunchily, he angrily inquired:
- Where do you go, Privalov? Third time calling, disgrace!
“Happy New Year, Modest Matveyevich,” I said.
He chewed silently for a while, then answered in a lower tone:
- Respectively. How is the duty?
“Just walked around the premises,” I said. - Everything is fine.
Was there spontaneous combustion?
- Not at all.
– Is it de-energized everywhere?
“Briareus broke his finger,” I said.
He became alarmed.
- Briares? Wait… Yeah, inventory number 1489… Why?
I explained.
– What did you do?
I told.
“The right decision,” said Modest Matveyevich. - Continue to watch. That's all I wanted to say.
Immediately after Modest Matveyevich, Edik Amperian from the Linear Happiness Department called and politely asked to calculate the optimal carefree coefficients for responsible employees.
I agreed, and we agreed to meet in the electronic room in two hours. Then came the double
Oyry-Oyry and in a colorless voice asked for the keys to Janus Poluektovich's safe. I refused. He
began to insist. I kicked him out.
A minute later, Roman himself rushed in.
- Give me the keys.
I shook my head.
- I'm not giving it.
- Give me the keys!
- Go to the bath. I am a financially responsible person.
- Sasha, I'll take the safe!
I grinned and said:
- Ask.
Roman stared at the safe and tensed up, but the safe was either locked or bolted to the floor.
- What do you need there? I asked.
“Documentation for RU-16,” said Roman. - Well, give me the keys!
I laughed and held out my hand to the key box. And at the same moment a piercing cry
came from somewhere above. I jumped up.Chapter Four
Woe! Small I am not strong;
The ghoul will eat me completely ...
A. S. Pushkin“Hatched,” Roman said calmly, looking up at the ceiling.
- Who? - I felt uneasy: the cry was female.
“Vybegallov ghoul,” said Roman. - More precisely, a cadaver.
Why was the woman screaming?
"You'll see," said Roman.
He took my hand, jumped up, and we rushed through the floors. Penetrating the ceilings, we cut into the ceilings like a knife through frozen butter, then with a smacking sound, we jumped out into the air and
again crashed into the ceiling. It was dark between the ceilings, and the little gnomes, interspersed with
mice, with frightened squeaks, shied away from us, and in laboratories and offices, through which
we flew by, employees with puzzled faces looked up.
In the "Maternity Hospital" we pushed our way through the crowd of inquisitives and saw Professor Vibegallo completely naked at the laboratory table. His bluish-white skin gleamed wetly, his wet beard hung down in a wedge, wet hair covered his low forehead, on which an active volcanic pimple burned. Empty transparent eyes, blinking rarely, groped senselessly
around the room.
Professor Vibegallo ate. On the table in front of him smoked a large photographic cell,
filled to the top with steamed bran. Paying no special attention to anyone, he scooped up the bran with a wide palm, kneaded it with his fingers like pilaf, and the resulting lump was sent
into the mouth opening, generously sprinkling crumbs on the beard. At the same time, he crunched, smacked, grunted,
snored, tilted his head to one side and screwed up his eyes, as if from great pleasure. Occasionally,
without ceasing to swallow and choke, he became agitated, grabbed the bran vats and buckets of
inversely, standing next to him on the floor, and each time he pulled them closer and closer to him. On
At the other end of the table, a young witch trainee Stella with clean pink ears, pale
and tearfully, with trembling lips, she cut the loaves of bread into huge slices and, turning away, offered them to Vibegalla on outstretched arms. The central autoclave was opened, overturned,
and a vast greenish puddle spread around it.
Vibegallo suddenly said unintelligibly:
- Hey, girl ... this ... give milk! Lei, mean, right here, in the bran ... Sil wu ple, mean ...
Stella hurriedly picked up the bucket and splashed back into the ditch.
- Eh! exclaimed Professor Vibegallo. - The dishes are small, that means! You, girl, how are you, this one,
straight to chan lei. We will, therefore, eat from a vat ...
Stella began to tip buckets into a vat of bran, and the professor, grabbing the cuvette like a spoon,
began to scoop up bran and send it into the mouth, which suddenly opened incredibly wide.
- Give him a call! Stella screamed plaintively. “He’s going to eat everything now!”
“They already called,” the crowd said. "You'd better get away from him anyway." Get up here.
Well, is he coming? Will he come?
- Said he was coming out. Galoshes, that means, puts on and goes out. Get away from him, they tell you.
I finally figured out what was going on. It wasn't Professor Vibegallo. It was a newborn cadaver, a model of a Man who was unsatisfied with his stomach. And thank God, otherwise I already thought that
the professor had cerebral palsy. As a result of hard work.
Stella stepped back cautiously. They grabbed her by the shoulders and pulled her into the crowd. She hid behind my
back, clutching at my elbow, and I immediately straightened my shoulders, although I still did not understand what was the matter
And what is she so afraid of? Cadaver ate. There was a shocked silence in the laboratory full of people, and
all that was heard was how he sniffed and crunched like a horse, and scraped the cuvette against the walls of the vat.
We watched. He got down from his chair and plunged his head into the vat. The women turned away. Lilechka Novosmekhova became ill and was taken out into the corridor. Then the clear voice of Edik Amperian said:
- Fine. Let's be logical. Now he will finish off the bran, then he will finish the bread. And then?
There was movement in the front rows. The crowd pressed towards the doors. I began to understand. Stella
said in a thin voice:
- There are also herring heads ...
- A lot of?
- Two tons.
“Hmmm,” Eddie said. – And where are they?
“They have to be conveyed,” Stella said. - But I tried, and the conveyor is broken ...
“By the way,” Roman said loudly, “for the past two minutes I have been trying to passivate him, and to no avail ...
“Me too,” Edik said.
“Therefore,” said Roman, “it would be very good if one of the especially squeamish
took over the assembly line. Like a palliative. Are there any other masters here? I see Ed.
Is there anyone else? Korneev! Viktor Pavlovich, are you here?
- He is not here. Maybe run after Fedor Simeonovich?
“I don't think there's anything to worry about right now. We'll manage somehow. Edik, let's be together, concentrated.
- In what mode?
– In braking mode. Up to tetanus. Guys, help everyone who can.
“Just a minute,” Edik said. What if we damage it?
“Yes, yes, yes,” I said. - You better not. Let him eat me better.
- Don't worry, don't worry. We'll be careful. Edik, let's touch. In one
touch.
“Begin,” said Edik.
It got even quieter. The cadaver tossed and turned in the vat, and behind the wall the volunteers fiddling with the conveyor chattered and tapped. A minute has passed. The cadaver got out of the vat, wiped off his beard, looked sleepily at us, and suddenly, with a deft movement, stretching out his hand incredibly far, grabbed the last loaf of bread. Then he burped roaringly and leaned back in his chair, his hands folded on the huge
swollen belly. Bliss spread over his face. He snored and smiled senselessly. He
was undoubtedly happy, as an extremely tired person who has finally reached
to the desired bed.
“It seems to have worked,” someone in the crowd said with a relieved sigh.
Roman pursed his lips doubtfully.
“I don’t have that impression,” Edik said politely.
“Maybe his factory is over?” I said hopefully.
Stella complained:
- It's just relaxation ... A paroxysm of contentment. He will wake up again soon.
“You are weaklings, masters,” said a manly voice. - Let me go, I'll go and call Fyodor Simeonovich.
Everyone looked at each other, smiling uncertainly. Roman thoughtfully played with the umclidet, rolling it on
palms. Stella trembled, whispering: “What will it be? Sasha, I'm afraid! As for me, I puffed out my chest, frowned, and struggled with a passionate desire to call Modest Matveyevich. To me
I really wanted to abdicate responsibility. It was a weakness and I was powerless over it. Modest Matveyevich seemed to me now in a very special light, and I hopefully recalled the master's thesis defended last month "On the relationship between the laws of nature and the laws of
administration”, where, in particular, it was proved that very often administrative laws, due to their specific inflexibility, turn out to be more effective than natural and magical laws. I was convinced that Modest Matveyevich should have appeared here and yelled at the ghoul:
"You will stop this, Comrade Vibegallo!" - like a ghoul would immediately stop.
“Roman,” I said casually, “I think you can dematerialize him as a last resort?”
Roman laughed and patted me on the shoulder.
“Don't be afraid,” he said. - These are all toys. Only reluctance to get involved with Vibegalla ... This
don't be afraid, you're afraid of that! He pointed to the second autoclave, peacefully clicking in the corner.
Meanwhile, the cadaver suddenly stirred uneasily. Stella squealed softly and clung to
to me. The husk's eyes opened. First he bent down and looked into the vat. Then he rattled empty buckets. Then he froze and sat motionless for a while. The expression of contentment on his face was replaced by an expression of bitter resentment. He got up, quickly sniffed, moving his nostrils, the table and, stretching out his long red tongue, licked the crumbs.
- Well, hold on, guys ... - whispered in the crowd.
The cadaver put his hand into the vat, pulled out a cuvette, examined it from all sides and carefully bit off
edge. His eyebrows rose in pain. He took another bite and crunched. His face turned blue
as if from intense irritation, his eyes moistened, but he bit again and again until he chewed the whole
cuvette. For a minute he sat in thought, testing his teeth with his fingers, then slowly glanced over the frozen crowd. He had a bad look - evaluating, choosing some. Volodya Pochkin involuntarily said: “But, but, quietly, you ...” And then empty transparent eyes rested
at Stella, and she let out a scream, that same heartbreaking scream that turns into an ultrasound,
which Roman and I had already heard in the director's office four floors down. I shuddered.
Cadaver was also embarrassed: he lowered his eyes and nervously drummed his fingers on the table.
There was a noise at the door, everyone moved, and through the crowd, pushing aside those gaping, tearing out
icicles from a beard, Ambrose Ambruazovich Vybegallo climbed. Real. He smelled of vodka
zipun and frost.
- Honey! he shouted. – What is it, huh? Kel setuasien! 9 Stella, what are you looking at!..
Where is the herring? He has needs! .. He has them growing! .. My works must be read!
He approached the cadaver, and the cadaver immediately began sniffing it greedily. Vibegallo gave him the zipun.
Needs must be met! he said, hurriedly flipping switches on the conveyor console. Why didn't you give it right away? Oh, these le fam, le fam! .. 10 Who said that it was broken? And not
completely broken, but conspired. So that, therefore, not everyone can use, because, this, the needs of
everyone, and the herring for the model...
A window opened in the wall, the conveyor rumbled, and a stream of fragrant herring heads poured directly onto the floor. The husk's eyes flashed. He fell on all fours, galloped at a fractional trot to
window and set to work. Vibegallo, standing nearby, clapped his hands, exclaimed with joy, and from time to time
time, overflowing with feelings, began to scratch the cadaver behind the ear.
The crowd breathed a sigh of relief and moved. It turned out that Vibegallo brought with him two
correspondents of the regional newspaper. The correspondents were acquaintances - G. Perceptive and B. Pi9Gee! (French)10Women, women! .. (French)
volume book. They also smelled of vodka. Sparkling with flashes, they began to photograph and record
in booklets. G. Insightful and B. Pitomnik specialized in science. G. insightful
was famous for the phrase: "Oort was the first to look at the starry sky and notice that the Galaxy is rotating." He also owned: a literary record of Merlin's narration about the journey with the chairman of the district council and an interview taken (for illiteracy) from the duplicate of Oira-Oira. The interview was titled "The Man with a Capital M" and began with the words: "Like any true scientist, he was
taciturn…” B. The kennel parasitized Vibegalla. His combat essays on self-putting shoes, on self-pulling-self-packing carrots in trucks, and on other Vibegalla projects were widely known in the region, and the article "The Magician from Solovets" even appeared in one
from mainstream magazines.
When the cadavers had another paroxysm of contentment and he dozed off, Vibegalla's laboratory assistants, who had come to the rescue, uprooted from the New Year's tables and therefore very unfriendly, hastily dressed him in a black pair and slipped a chair under him. The correspondents put Vibegalla next to him, put his hands on the shoulders of the cadaver and, aiming their lenses, asked him to continue.
- The main thing is what? Vibegallo proclaimed readily. - The main thing is that a person be happy. I notice this in brackets: happiness is a human concept. And what is a man, philosophically
speaking? Man, comrades, is homo sapiens, who can and wants to. Maybe this one is all she wants, eh
wants everything he can. Nes pa, comrades? If he, that is, a man, can do whatever he wants, and wants everything,
what can, then he is happy. So we will define it. That we are here, comrades, in front of us
have? We have a model. But this model, comrades, wants it, and that's good. So to speak, excelent,
exvi, charmant11. And yet, comrades, you can see for yourself what it can do. And that's even better, because
so, then she ... he means happy. There is a metaphysical transition from unhappiness to happiness, and
this cannot surprise us, because happy people are not born, but happy, this one, they become.
Thanks to the care and the right attitude towards you. Now it is waking up... It wants to. AND
therefore it is still unfortunate. But it can, and through this "can" a dialectical leap is made. In, in!.. Look! Have you seen how it can? Wow, my dear, wow, my joyful! .. In, in!
That's how it can! It can take ten or fifteen minutes... You, comrade Pitomnik, set aside your camera, and you take a movie camera, because here we have a process... here we have
everything is in motion! Peace with us, as it should be, is relative, our movement is absolute. Here
So. Now it has succeeded and dialectically passes to happiness. To satisfaction, that is. See, it has closed its eyes. Enjoys. He is well. I scientifically assure you that I would be ready to change with him. At this moment, of course... You, Comrade Insightful, write down everything I say, and
then give me. I'll smooth it and paste the links... Now it's dormant, but that's not all. Our needs must go both in depth and in breadth. This, therefore, will be the only true process. He is di ke12, Vibegallo, they say, against the spiritual world. This, comrades, is a label. We, comrades,
It is high time to forget such manners in scientific discussion. We all know that the material comes first,
and the spiritual comes behind. Saturventur, as you know, does not study libentur13. What are we, in relation to
In this case, let’s translate it like this: the hungry godfather has all the bread on his mind ...
“On the contrary,” said the Oira-Oira.
For some time Vibegallo looked at him blankly, then said:
- We, comrades, will now mark this remark from the audience with indignation. How unorganized.
We will not be distracted from the main thing - from practice. Let's leave the theory to people who are not sufficiently versed in it. I continue and move on to the next step of the experiment. I explain to the press. proceeding
from the materialistic idea that the temporary satisfaction of material needs has occurred,
you can proceed to the satisfaction of spiritual needs. That is, watch a movie, TV, listen to folk music or sing for yourself, and even read some book, say, "Crocodile" or a newspaper ... We, comrades, do not forget that you need to have the ability to do all this, in addition
time, as the satisfaction of material needs, does not require special abilities, they are always there, because
nature follows materialism. So far, we can’t say anything about the spiritual abilities of this model11Wonderful, excellent, lovely (French).12They say that ... (French)13A full belly is deaf to learning (lat.).
which we cannot, since its rational grain is gastric dissatisfaction. But we will now isolate these spiritual abilities from her.
Gloomy lab assistants set up a tape recorder, a radio, a movie projector, and a small portable library on the tables. Cadavr looked at the instruments of culture with an indifferent glance and
tasted tape. It became clear that the spirit ability of the model does not spontaneously
will appear. Then Vibegallo ordered to begin, as he put it, the forcible introduction of cultural skills. The tape recorder sang sweetly: “We parted with the sweetheart, swore our love ...” The radio whistled and hooted. The projector began to show the cartoon "The Wolf and the Seven Kids" on the wall. Two laboratory assistants stood with magazines in their hands on the sides of the cadavers and began
eager to read aloud...
As expected, the gastric model reacted to all this noise with complete indifference. While she wanted to eat, she sneezed at her spiritual world, because she wanted to eat and ate. Having been sated, she ignored her spiritual world, because she was a nightingale and temporarily
wanted nothing more. Vigilant Vibegallo nevertheless managed to notice the undoubted connection between
the sound of a drum (from a radio receiver) and reflex trembling of the model's lower extremities.
This trembling delighted him.
- Leg! he shouted, grabbing B. Nursery by the sleeve. - Take off your leg! Close-up! la
vibrasion sa mole gosh etune grand blue! 14 This leg will sweep away all the intrigues and rip off all the labels that are hung on me! Wee san dot15, a person who is not an expert, maybe even surprised
How do I feel about this leg? But after all, comrades, everything great is revealed in the small, and I must remind you that this model is a model of limited needs, speaking specifically - only one need and, calling a spade a spade, directly, in our opinion, without all these veils - a model
gastric needs. Therefore, she has such a limitation in her spiritual needs. And we affirm
that only a variety of material needs can provide a variety of spirit needs. I explain for the press on an example available to her. If, say, he had a pronounced need for this Astra-7 tape recorder for one hundred and forty rubles, what need should be understood
us as material, and it would have this tape recorder, then it would have twisted this tape recorder
would, because, you know, what else to do with a tape recorder? And if it would turn, then with music, and
if it’s music, you have to listen to it or dance there ... And what, comrades, is listening to music with dancing
or without them? It is the satisfaction of spirit needs. Comprene wu?
I have long noticed that the behavior of the cadaver has changed significantly. Is there something in it
went wrong, or it should have been so, but his relaxation time was getting shorter and shorter, so that by the end of Vibegalla's speech he no longer left the conveyor. However, it might just be difficult for him to move around.
“Resolve the question,” Edik said politely. – How do you explain the cessation of paroxysms
contentment?
Vibegallo fell silent and looked at the cadavers. Cadaver ate. Vibegallo looked at Edik.
“Yes, I do,” he said smugly. - The question, comrades, is correct. And, I would even say smart
question, comrades. We have before us a concrete model of continuously growing material needs. And only to a superficial observer it may seem that the paroxysms of contentment have allegedly ceased. In fact, they dialectically moved into a new quality. They, comrades, have extended to the very process of satisfying needs. Now it's not enough for him to be
full. Now the needs have increased, now he needs to eat all the time, now he is self-taught and
knows that chewing is also wonderful. Do you understand, Comrade Amperian?
I looked at Edik. Edik smiled politely. Next to him stood Fedor's doubles hand in hand
Simeonovich and Cristobal Khozevich. Their heads, with widely spaced ears, slowly turned around their axis, like airfield radars.
– Can I ask you another question? Roman said.
“Please,” Vibegallo said with a wearily condescending air.
- Ambrose Ambruazovich, - said Roman, - what will happen when it consumes everything?
Vibegalla's gaze became angry.
14The trembling of his left calf is a great sign! (French)15Of course (French).
- I ask all those present to note this provocative question, from which a mile away
reeks of Malthusianism, neo-Malthusianism, pragmatism, existentialism... oa... insincerity and disbelief, comrades, in the inexhaustible power of mankind. What do you want to say with this question, Comrade Oira-Oira? That in the activities of our scientific institution there may come a moment, a crisis, a regression, when our consumers will not have enough consumer products? Not good, comrade
Oira-Oira! You didn't think! And we cannot allow our work to be labeled and
cast a shadow. And we, comrades, will not allow this.
He took out a handkerchief and wiped his beard. G. Insightful, grimacing at the mental
tension, asked the following question:
- Of course, I'm not an expert. But what is the future of this model? I understand that the experiment
runs successfully. But she is very active.
Vibegallo smiled bitterly.
“You see, Comrade Oira-Oira,” he said. “That’s how unhealthy sensations arise.
You asked a question without thinking. And now an ordinary comrade is wrongly oriented. Not for that ideal
looks ... Look at the wrong ideal, Comrade Insightful! he turned directly to the correspondent. – This model has already passed the stage! Here is the ideal to look at! He walked over to the second autoclave and placed a red-haired hand on its polished side. His beard was up. This is our ideal! he proclaimed. - Or, to be more precise, here is a model of our
ideal. We have here a universal consumer who wants everything and everything, respectively,
Maybe. All the needs in it are laid down, which only exist in the world. And all these needs
can satisfy. With the help of our science, of course. I explain to the press. The universal consumer model contained in this autoclave, or, in our language, in a self-locking device,
wants unlimited. All of us, comrades, with all due respect to us, are simply zeros next to her.
Because she wants things that we have no idea about. And she won't wait for mercy
from nature. She will take from nature everything she needs for complete happiness, that is, for satisfaction. The material-magical forces themselves will extract from the surrounding nature everything it needs. The happiness of this model will be indescribable. She will know no hunger, no thirst, no toothache
pain, no personal troubles. All her needs will be instantly satisfied as they are
occurrence.
“Excuse me,” Edik said politely, “and all her needs will be material?”
- Well, of course! cried Vibegallo. – Spiritual needs will develop in accordance! I
already noted that the more material needs, the more diverse will be spiritual needs. It will be a giant of the spirit and a luminary!
I looked around at those present. Many were dumbfounded. Correspondents wrote desperately. Some, I noticed, looked with a strange expression from the autoclave to the continuously swallowing cadavers and back. Stella, leaning her forehead against my shoulder, sobbed and whispered: “I’ll leave
I can’t get out of here, I’ll leave…” I, it seems, also began to understand what Oira-Oira was afraid of. I imagined a huge open mouth, into which, thrown by magical power, animals poured,
people, cities, continents, planets and suns...
“Amvrosy Ambruazovich,” said Oira-Oira. – Can a universal consumer create
stone, which even with the strongest desire will not be able to lift?
Vibegallo thought, but only for a second.
“That is not a need,” he replied. - This is a whim. That's not why I created mine
doubles, so that they, therefore, were capricious.
“A whim can also be a need,” Oira-Oira objected.
“Let's not engage in scholasticism and casuistry,” suggested Vibegallo. – And let's not draw ecclesiastical analogies.
“We won’t,” said Oira-Oira.
B. The kennel looked angrily at him and again turned to Vibegalla:
- And when and where will the demonstration of the universal model take place, Amvrosy Ambruazovich?
“The answer,” said Vibegallo. “The demonstration will take place here, in this laboratory of mine. The press will be informed about the moment later.
- But it will be in the coming days?
- There is an opinion that it will be in the next few hours. So the press comrades best stay-
sit and wait.
Here the doubles of Fedor Simeonovich and Cristobal Hozevich, as if on command, turned and
came out. Oira-Oira said:
“Don’t you think, Amvrosy Ambruazovich, that such a demonstration should be held indoors,
Yes, even in the city center, is it dangerous?
“We have nothing to fear,” Vibegallo said weightily. “Let our enemies, this one, be wary.
“Remember, I told you that it is possible…
- You, comrade Oira-Oira, are not sufficiently savvy. It is necessary to distinguish, comrade OiraOira, possibility from reality, chance from necessity, theory from practice, and in general ...
- Still, maybe at the training ground ...
“I'm not testing a bomb,” Vibegallo said arrogantly. I am testing a model of the ideal
person. What are the other questions?
Some smart guy from the Ultimate Knowledge Department began to ask about the autoclave's operation mode. Vibegallo eagerly launched into explanations. Gloomy laboratory assistants were collecting their equipment
satisfaction of spiritual needs. Cadaver ate. The black vapor on it crackled, spreading across
seams. Oira-Oira studied him. Then he suddenly said loudly:
- There is an offer. Anyone not personally interested should leave the premises immediately.
Everyone turned to him.
"It's going to be very dirty in here," he explained. - Impossibly dirty.
“This is a provocation,” Vibegallo said with dignity.
Roman, grabbing my sleeve, dragged me to the door. I dragged Stella along with me. The rest of the audience followed us. Roman was believed at the institute, Vibegalla was not. Out of the outsiders, only correspondents remained in the laboratory, and we crowded in the corridor.
- What's the matter? Roman was asked. - What will happen? Why is it dirty?
“Now it will explode,” Roman answered, not taking his eyes off the door.
- Who will rip? Vibegallo?
“I feel sorry for the correspondents,” Edik said. - Listen, Sasha, does the shower work for us today?
The laboratory door opened and two laboratory assistants came out, dragging a vat of empty buckets.
The third laboratory assistant, looking around warily, fussed around and muttered: “Come on, guys, let me
help, it's hard...
“Close the doors,” Roman advised.
The bustling laboratory assistant hurriedly slammed the door shut and approached us, pulling out cigarettes. Eyes
he had round ones and ran.
“Well, now it will be…” he said. - A perceptive fool, I winked at him ... How he eats! ..
Crazy how he eats ...
“It's twenty-five minutes past two…” Roman began.
And then there was a roar. Broken glass rang out. The lab door grunted and ripped open.
loops. A camera and someone's tie were carried through the crack. We shied away. Stella
screamed again.
“Calm down,” said Roman. - That's all. One consumer on earth has become less.
The laboratory assistant, white as a dressing gown, was constantly puffing on a cigarette. Squishing, coughing, unintelligible curses came from the laboratory. There was a bad smell. I mumbled hesitantly:
- We need to see if...
Nobody responded. Everyone looked at me sympathetically. Stella wept softly and held me
for a jacket. Someone explained to someone in a whisper: “He is on duty today, understand? .. Someone must go
rake…”
I took a few hesitant steps towards the door, but then the correspondents and Vibegallo got out of the laboratory, clinging to each other.
God, what were they like?
Coming to my senses, I pulled a platinum whistle out of my pocket and whistled. Pushing the employees aside, an emergency team of brownies-vacuum trucks hastened to me.Chapter Five
Believe me, it was the most terrible sight in the world.
F. RabelaisWhat struck me most of all was that Vibegallo was not in the least discouraged by what had happened.
While the brownies were processing him, pouring absorbents on him and anointing him with incense, he spoke in falsetto:
- Here you are, comrades Oira-Oira and Amperian, you were also afraid of everything. What, they say, will be, but how, they say,
to stop him... There is, there is in you, comrades, a kind of unhealthy, that means skepticism. I would say
a kind of distrust in the forces of nature, in human capabilities. And where is it now, your distrust? It's burst! It burst, comrades, before the eyes of the general public and splashed me, and now
press comrades...
The press lost silence, obediently substituting its sides under the hissing jets of absorbents. G. Perceptive was trembling. B. The kennel shook his head and involuntarily licked his lips.
When the brownies tidied up the laboratory as a first approximation, I looked inside. avralnaya
the team busily inserted glasses and burned the remains of the gastric model in the muffle furnace. remains
was not enough: a bunch of buttons with the inscription "for gentleman"16, a jacket sleeve, incredibly stretched
braces and false teeth resembling the fossil jaw of Gigantopithecus. The rest appears to have crumbled to dust. Vibegallo examined the second autoclave, which is also a self-locking device, and announced that everything was in order. “I ask the press to me,” he said. - I suggest others to return to their
direct duties. The press pulled out their books, and the three of them sat down at the table and began
clarify the details of the essay “The Birth of a Discovery” and the informational note “Professor Vibegallo
tells."
The audience dispersed. Oira-Oira left, taking the keys to Janus Poluektovich's safe from me. Stella left in despair, whom Vibegallo refused to let go to another department. Significantly perked up laboratory assistants left. Edik left, surrounded by a crowd of theoreticians, estimating on the go the minimum possible pressure in the stomach of the exploding cadaver. I also went to my post,
having previously made sure that the test of the second cadaver will take place no earlier than eight in the morning.
The experiment made a painful impression on me, and, sitting in a huge armchair in
receptionist, for some time I tried to understand whether Vibegallo was a fool or a cunning demagogue-hack. The scientific value of all his cadavers was obviously equal to zero. Models based on own takes
any employee who defended his master's thesis and completed a two-year special course on nonlinear transgression could create. Endowing these models with magical properties also cost nothing, because there were reference books, tables and textbooks for graduate magicians.
These models, by themselves, never proved anything and, from the point of view of science, represented nothing.
more interesting than card tricks or sword swallowing. It was possible, of course, to understand all
those unfortunate correspondents who clung to Vibegalla like flies to a rubbish heap. Because from the point
to the eyes of a layman, all this was unusually effective, causing respectful trembling and vague
a sense of great potential. It was more difficult to understand Vibegalla with his painful
passion to arrange circus performances and public explosions for the needs of the curious, deprived of the opportunity (and desire) to understand the essence of the issue. Except for two or three exhausted
business trips of absolutes who love to give interviews about the state of affairs in infinity, no one at the institute, to put it mildly, abused contacts with the press: this was considered bad
tone and had a deep inner justification.
The fact is that the most interesting and elegant scientific results quite often have
the property of appearing abstruse and drearily incomprehensible to the uninitiated. People who are far from science
our time expect from it a miracle and only a miracle and are practically unable to distinguish the real scientific
a miracle from a trick or some kind of intellectual flip-mortale. The science of witchcraft and wizardry is no exception. Organize a conference of famous ghosts at the TV studio
or drill a hole in a half-meter concrete wall with a glance, many can, and no one needs it, but this delights the most respectable public, who have little idea of ​​the extent to which science has woven and confused the concepts of a fairy tale and reality. But try to find a deep
internal connection between the boring property of the gaze and the philological characteristics of the word
16"Male" (English).
"concrete", try to solve this small private problem, known as the Great
Auers Trouble! It was solved by Oira-Oira, who created the theory of fantastic generality and laid the foundation for
a completely new branch of mathematical magic. But almost no one has heard of Oyre-Oyre, but
everyone knows Professor Vibegalla very well. (“How, do you work at NIICHAVO? Well, how is Vibegallo? What else did he discover new? ..”) This is because the ideas of Oira-Oira are capable
to perceive only two or three hundred people on the entire globe, and among these two or three hundred it is enough
many corresponding members and - alas! There are no correspondents. And Vibegalla's classic work "Fundamentals of Technology for the Production of Self-Supporting Shoes", stuffed with demagogic chatter, made a fair amount of noise with the cares of B. Pitomnik. (Later it turned out that self-dressing boots cost more than a motorcycle and are afraid of dust and dampness.)
The time was late. I was pretty tired and fell asleep unnoticed. I dreamed of some kind of evil spirits: many-legged giant mosquitoes, bearded like Vibegallo, talking buckets of reverse, a vat on
short legs, running up the stairs. Sometimes some indiscreet peek into my dream
brownie, but, seeing such passions, frightened away. I woke up in pain and saw next to me
gloomy bearded mosquito, which tried to run its thick, like a fountain pen, trunk in me
caviar.
"Shoot!" I yelled and punched him in the bulging eye.
The mosquito purred offendedly and ran away. He was big as a dog, red and tan. Probably, in a dream, I unconsciously uttered the materialization formula and accidentally called from
nothingness is a sullen animal. I failed to drive him back into oblivion. Then I armed myself
volume of Equations of Mathematical Magic, opened the window and drove the mosquito out into the cold. A blizzard immediately swirled him, and he disappeared into the darkness. This is how unhealthy sensations arise, I thought.
It was six o'clock in the morning. I listened. There was silence in the institute. Either everyone worked diligently, or they had already gone home. I should have made one more detour, but I couldn't go anywhere.
I wanted and wanted something to eat, because I ate for the last time eighteen hours ago.
And I decided to put a double instead of myself.
Actually, I'm still a very weak mage. Inexperienced. If anyone was here, I would never
did not dare to show his ignorance. But I was alone, and I decided to take a chance, and at the same time a little
practice. In the Equations of Mathemagic, I found a general formula, substituted my parameters into it, did all the necessary manipulations and pronounced all the necessary expressions in ancient Chaldean. Still, teaching and work will grind everything. For the first time in my life, I got a decent
double. He had everything in place, and he even looked a little like me, only his left eye
for some reason it did not open, and there were six fingers on the hands. I explained the task to him, he nodded,
shuffled his foot and walked away, staggering away. We didn't meet with him again. Maybe he was inadvertently brought into the bunker to Z. Gorynych, or maybe he went on an endless journey on a rim
Wheels of Fortune - I don't know, I don't know. The fact is that I very soon forgot about him, because I decided
make your own breakfast.
I am an unpretentious person. All I needed was a sandwich with doctor's sausage and
a cup of black coffee. I don’t understand how I did it, but first a doctor’s coat formed on the table, thickly smeared with oil. When the first attack of natural amazement had passed, I
examined the dressing gown carefully. The butter was not butter or even vegetable oil. Here I need
was to destroy the robe and start all over again. But with disgusting arrogance I imagined
himself as a god-creator and followed the path of successive transformations. Appeared next to the robe
a bottle of black liquid, and the dressing gown itself, after some hesitation, began to char around the edges. I hastily refined my notions, placing particular emphasis on the imagery of the mug and the beef. The bottle turned into a mug, the liquid did not change, one sleeve of the dressing gown shrank, stretched out, turned red and became
twitch. Sweating with fear, I was convinced that it was a cow's tail. I got out of my chair and went to
corner. Things did not go further than the tail, but the spectacle was already eerie. I tried again and
tail curled up. I pulled myself together, closed my eyes and began to imagine with all possible clarity in my mind a slice of ordinary rye bread, how it is cut off from a loaf, spread with butter -
creamy, from a crystal butter dish - and put a circle of sausage on it. God be with her, with a doctorate,
let it be an ordinary half-smoked Poltava. With coffee, I decided to wait for now. When I carefully opened my eyes, on the doctor's coat lay a large piece of rock crystal, inside which
something darkened. I picked up this crystal, a robe stretched behind the crystal, inexplicably attached to it, and inside the crystal I discerned a coveted sandwich, very similar to a real one. I am for-
groaned and tried to mentally split the crystal. It became covered with a dense network of cracks, so that the sandwich almost disappeared from sight. “Stupid,” I said to myself, “you have eaten thousands of sandwiches, and you are unable to imagine them with any clarity. Don't worry, there's no one, no one sees you. Is not
credit, not a test and not an exam. Try again". And I tried. I'd rather not try.
For some reason my imagination went wild, the most unexpected associations flickered on and off in my brain, and, as I tried, the waiting room was filled with strange objects. Many of them
came out, apparently, from the subconscious, from the dense jungle of hereditary memory, from primitive fears long suppressed by higher education. They had limbs and moved continuously, they made disgusting sounds, they were indecent, they were aggressive and all the time
fought. I looked around in awe. All this vividly reminded me of old engravings depicting
scenes of the temptation of St. Anthony. Particularly unpleasant was the oval dish on spider legs,
covered along the edges with hard sparse wool. I don’t know what he wanted from me, but it was moving away
into the far corner of the room, accelerated and with all its might gave me under my knees until I pressed
his chair against the wall. In the end, I managed to destroy some of the items, the rest dispersed
corners and hid. Remained: a dish, a dressing gown with a crystal and a mug with a black liquid that has grown to the size of a jug. I picked it up with both hands and sniffed it. I think they were black
pen ink. The dish behind the chair moved, scratching the colored linoleum with its paws, and disgustingly
hissed. I felt very uncomfortable.
Footsteps and voices were heard in the corridor, the door swung open, Janus Poluektovich appeared on the threshold and, as always, said: “So.” I tossed. Janus Poluektovich went to his office, on the move casually, with one universal movement of his eyebrow, liquidating the entire cabinet of curiosities I had created. He was followed by Fedor Simeonovich, Cristobal Junta with a thick black cigar in the corner
mouth, frowning Vibegallo and decisive Roman Oira-Oira. They were all preoccupied, in a great hurry, and did not pay any attention to me. The door to the office was left open. With a sigh of relief, I sat down in my old place and then found that a large porcelain room was waiting for me.
a mug of steaming coffee and a plate of sandwiches. One of the titans took care of me, I don't know who. I began to eat breakfast, listening to the voices coming from the office.
“Let’s start with,” Cristobal Hozevich said with cold contempt, “that yours, excuse me,
"Maternity Hospital" is located exactly under my laboratories. You've already set off one explosion, and
as a result, I had to wait for ten minutes for the glass that had flown out to be inserted in my office. I strongly suspect that you will not take into account arguments of a more general nature, and therefore I proceed from purely selfish considerations ...
“That, dear, is my business, what I do at home,” answered Vibegallo in falsetto. “I don’t touch your floor, although you’ve had living water flowing endlessly lately. She's all over me
the ceiling is soaked, and the bugs start up from it. But I don't touch your floor, and you don't touch mine.
“G-darling,” Fyodor Simeonovich rumbled, “Ambrose Ambruazovich!” N-must be accepted.
c-attention c-possible complications... C-after all, no one deals with, say, a d-dragon in
building, x-although there are refractories, and ...
“I don’t have a dragon, I have a happy person!” Spirit giant! It's strange how you talk
Comrade Kivrin, your analogies are strange, strange! A model of an ideal person - and some kind of non-class fire-breathing dragon! ..
“D-my dear, it’s not that he’s out of class, it’s that he can c-set a fire…”
– Here, again! The perfect person can start a fire! You didn't think, Comrade Fyodor Simeonovich!
“I’m r-talking about the d-dragon…”
- And I'm talking about your wrong installation! You are erasing, Fyodor Simeonovich! you in every possible way
cover up! Of course, we are erasing the contradictions ... between the mental and the physical ... between the city and the countryside ... between a man and a woman, finally ... But we will not cover up the abyss for you
allow, Fyodor Simeonovich!
“Wh-what abyss?” What the hell is R-novel, after all?.. You explained it to him in front of me! I s-say, Ambrose Amb-bruazovich, that your experiment is op-pasful, do you understand?.. The city can be damaged, p-understand?
- I understand everything. I won't let the perfect man hatch out in the open field on
wind!
– Ambrose Ambruazovich, – said Roman, – I can repeat my argument once more.
The experiment is dangerous because...
- Here I am, Roman Petrovich, I have been looking at you for a long time and I just can’t understand how you can apply such expressions to an ideal person. The ideal man is dangerous to him, you see!
Here Roman, apparently due to his youth, lost his patience.
- Not a perfect person! he yelled. - And your genius-consumer!
There was an ominous silence.
- As you said? Vibegallo inquired in a terrible voice. - Repeat. What did you call
the perfect person?
“Yannus Poluektovich,” said Fyodor Simeonovich, “so, my friend, it’s impossible after all ...
- It is forbidden! exclaimed Vibegallo. - That's right, Comrade Kivrin, you can't! We have an experiment of international scientific sound! The giant of the spirit must appear here, within the walls of our institute! It's symbolic! Comrade Oira-Oira with his pragmatic bias is businesslike, comrades,
relates to the problem! And Comrade Junta also looks narrow-minded! Don't look at me comrade
The junta, the tsarist gendarmes did not intimidate me, and you will not intimidate me either! Is it in ours, comrades,
spirit to be afraid of experiment? Of course, Comrade Junta, as a former foreigner and church worker, is allowed to be mistaken from time to time, but you, Comrade Oira-Oira, and you, Fyodor Simeonovich,
you are ordinary Russian people!
“S-stop the d-demagogy!” - Fyodor Simeonovich finally exploded. “H-how are you not ashamed to talk such nonsense? What am I to you a simple person? And what kind of word is this - simple? These are simple d-doubles!..
“I can only say one thing,” Cristobal Chozevich said indifferently. “I am a simple former Grand Inquisitor, and I will close access to your autoclave until I receive a guarantee that the experiment will be carried out at the test site.
“And n-no closer than five k-kilometers from the city,” added Fyodor Simeonovich. “Or d-even ten.”
Apparently, Vibegalla was terribly reluctant to drag his equipment and drag himself to
a test site where there was a blizzard and there was not enough lighting for newsreels.
“Yes,” he said, “understood. Fence off our science from the people. Then maybe not
ten kilometers, but directly ten thousand kilometers, Fyodor Simeonovich? Somewhere along that
side? Somewhere in Alaska, Cristobal Hozevich, or where are you from? So just say so. And we
let's write it down!
Silence reigned again, and one could hear Fyodor Simeonovich snoring menacingly, having lost
the gift of the word.
“Three hundred years ago,” Junta said coldly, “for such words, I would invite you for a walk
outside the city, where I would shake the dust from your ears and pierce you through.
“Nothing, nothing,” said Vibegallo. This is not Portugal. Don't like critics. Three hundred years
ago, I would not have stood on ceremony with you either, half-cut catholic.
I was twisted with hatred. Why is Janus silent? How much is possible? Dispersed in silence
steps, a pale, grinning Roman came into the waiting room and, snapping his fingers, created a double of Vibegalla. Then, with pleasure, he took the double by the chest, gently shook him, took hold of his beard, voluptuously jerked several times, calmed down, destroyed the double and returned to the office.
“But it’s necessary to drive you, V-begallo,” Fyodor Simeonovich said in an unexpectedly calm voice. “You seem to be a n-unpleasant figure.
"Critics, don't like critics," answered Vibegallo, panting.
And here Janus Poluektovich finally spoke. His voice was powerful, even, like that of Jacklondon captains.
- The experiment, according to the request of Ambrose Ambruazovich, will be carried out today at ten
zero zero. In view of the fact that the experiment will be accompanied by significant destruction, which will almost entail human casualties, I appoint the far sector as the place of the experiment.
landfill fifteen kilometers from the city limits. I take this opportunity to thank you in advance
Roman Petrovich for his resourcefulness and courage.
For a while, apparently, everyone digested this decision. Anyway, I digested. Janus Poluektovich still had an undoubtedly strange way of expressing his thoughts. However, everyone willingly believed that he knew better. There have already been precedents.
“I’m going to call a car,” Roman said suddenly and probably went through the wall, because in
the receptionist did not show up.
Fyodor Simeonovich and the Junta probably nodded their heads in agreement, and the recovered Vibegallo
cried:
– The right decision, Janus Poluektovich! Just in time you reminded us of the lost vigilance. Away, away from prying eyes. I just need movers. Autoclave
I'm heavy, so five tons after all...
"Of course," Janus said. - Get organized.
Chairs were moved in the office, and I hurriedly finished my coffee.
For the next hour, I, along with those who still remained at the institute, hung around at the entrance and watched how the autoclave, stereotubes, armored shields and zipuns were loaded just in case. The storm has subsided
the morning was cold and clear.Roman drove a truck on a caterpillar track. Ghoul Alfred brought loaders - hecatoncheirs. Kott and Gyes walked willingly, animatedly clamoring a hundred throats and rolling up numerous sleeves as they went, while Briareus trudged along, sticking out his clumsy finger, and whining that he was in pain, that
several heads are spinning around him, that he did not sleep the night. Kott took the autoclave, Gies - everything else. Then
Briareus, seeing that he did not get anything, began to order, give instructions and help
advice. He ran ahead, opened and held the doors, now and then squatted down and, looking from below, shouted: “Let's go! Let's go!" or “Take it right! You're hooked!" In the end, his hand was stepped on, and he himself was pinched between the autoclave and the wall. He burst into tears, and Alfred took
him back to the vivarium.
There were quite a few people in the truck. Vibegallo climbed into the driver's cab. He was very un-
satisfied and asked everyone what time it was. The truck was about to leave, but returned five minutes later, because it turned out that the correspondents had been forgotten. While they were looking for them, Kott and Gies started playing snowballs to keep warm, and broke two windows. Then Gies got into a fight with some early drunk who
yelled, "All for one, huh?" Gyes was dragged away and pushed back into the back of the truck. He rolled his eyes and
cursed menacingly in Hellenic. G. Insightful and B. Nursery appeared, trembling from sleep, and the truck finally drove off.
The institute is empty. It was half past nine. The whole city was asleep. I really wanted to go
along with everyone to the training ground, but there was nothing to do - I sighed and set off on the second round.
Yawning, I walked along the corridors and turned off the lights everywhere until I reached Vitka Korneev's laboratory. Vitka was not interested in Vibegalov experiments. He said that people like Vibegallo should be mercilessly handed over to the Junta as experimental animals to find out if they were lethal mutants. Therefore, Vitka did not go anywhere, but sat on
sofa-translator, smoking a cigarette and talking lazily with Edik Amperian. Edik was lying next to him,
thoughtfully looking at the ceiling, sucking on a lollipop. A perch was swimming briskly on the table in a tub of water.
“Happy New Year,” I said.
“Happy New Year,” Edik said affably.
“Let Sasha say it,” suggested Korneev. - Sasha, is there a non-protein life?
“I don't know,” I said. - Did not see. And what?
What do you mean you didn't see it? You have never seen the M-field either, but you calculate its intensity.
- So what? - I said. I was looking at a perch in the tub. The perch swam in circles, famously turning
on bends, and then it was clear that he was gutted. “Vitka,” I said, “did it work out after all?”
“Sasha doesn't want to talk about non-protein life,” Edik said. - And he's right.
“You can live without protein,” I said, “but how does he live without giblets?”
“But Comrade Amperyan says that you can’t live without protein,” said Vitka, forcing the stream
tobacco smoke curl up into a tornado and walk around the room, bending around objects.
“I say that life is a squirrel,” Edik objected.
“I don’t feel the difference,” Victor said. – You say that if there is no protein, then there is no life.
- Yes.
- Well, what is it? Vitka asked. He waved weakly.
On the table next to the bathroom appeared a disgusting creature that looked like a hedgehog and a spider at the same time. Eddie got up and looked at the table.
“Ah,” he said, and lay down again. - This is not life. It's undead. Is Koschei the Deathless a non-protein creature?
- And what do you want? Korneev asked. - Is it moving? Moves. Eating? Eats. And it can reproduce. Do you want it to multiply now?
Edik got up a second time and looked at the table. Spider-Hedgehog clumsily stomped on the spot. It seems
it was that he wanted to go to all four sides at the same time.
“Undead is not life,” Edik said. “Undead exist only in so far as intelligent life exists. You can even say more precisely: because there are magicians. Undead are waste
activities of magicians.
"Good," Vitka said.
The spider hedgehog has disappeared. Instead, little Vitka Korneev appeared on the table, an exact copy of the real one, but the size of a hand. He snapped his little fingers and created a microdouble more
smaller size. He also snapped his fingers. There was a double the size of a fountain pen. Then the size of a matchbox. Then - with a thimble.
- Enough? Vitka asked. “Each of them is a magician. None of them contain a protein molecule.
“Bad example,” Edik said with regret. First of all, they don't really
different from a CNC machine. Secondly, they are not the product of development,
but a product of your protein mastery. It is hardly worth arguing whether evolution is capable of producing self-propagating machine tools with program control.
“You know a lot about evolution,” said the rude Korneev. “Darwin for me too!” Who cares,
chemical process or conscious activity. At you too not all ancestors proteinaceous. Your great-great-great-mother was, I am ready to admit, quite complex, but not at all a protein molecule. And maybe
perhaps our so-called conscious activity is also a kind of evolution.
How do we know that the purpose of nature is to create Comrade Amperian? Maybe the purpose of nature is
the creation of the undead by the hands of Comrade Amperian. May be…
- I see, I understand. First a protovirus, then a protein, then Comrade Amperian, and then the whole
the planet is inhabited by the undead.
“Exactly,” Vitka said.
- And we all died out of uselessness.
- Why not? Vitka said.
“I have a friend,” said Edik. - He claims that man is only an intermediate link necessary for nature to create the crown of creation: a glass of cognac with a slice
lemon.
“And why not, after all?”
“But because I don’t feel like it,” said Edik. “Nature has its purposes, and I have mine.
“Anthropocentrist,” Vitka said with disgust.
“Yes,” said Edik proudly.
“I don’t want to argue with anthropocentrists,” said the rude Korneev.
“Then let’s tell jokes,” Edik suggested calmly and put another lollipop into his mouth.Vitka's duplicates on the table continued to work. The smallest was already the size of an ant.
As I listened to the argument between anthropocentrist and cosmocentrist, a thought came to my mind.
“Kids,” I said with artificial animation. Why didn't you go to the range?
- What for? Edik asked.
Well, it's still interesting...
“I never go to the circus,” Edik said. - In addition: Vales killed Nil, Velis Ibi Nil17.
- Are you talking about yourself? Vitka asked.
- No. I'm talking about Vibegalle.
“Children,” I said, “I am terribly fond of the circus. Do you care where you tell jokes?
- That is? Vitka said.
- Keep watch for me, and I'll run to the training ground.
- And what to do?
- De-energize, put out fires and remind everyone about labor laws.
“It’s cold,” Vitka reminded. - Freezing. Vibegallo.
“I really want to,” I said. “It's all very mysterious.
Let's release the baby? Vitka asked Edik.
Eddie nodded.
“Go, Privalov,” said Vitka. “It will cost you four hours of machine time.
“Two,” I said quickly. I was expecting something like this.
“Five,” Vitka said impudently.
“Well, three,” I said. “I work for you all the time.
“Six,” Vitka said coolly.
“Vitya,” said Edik, “hair will grow on your ears.”
“Redhead,” I said maliciously. “Maybe even green.”
- All right, - said Vitka, - go for nothing. Two hours will suit me.
We went to the reception together. On the way, the masters started an indistinct argument about some kind of cyclotation, and I had to interrupt them so that they would transgress me to the training ground. They were already fed up with me, and in their haste to get rid of me, they performed a transgression with such energy that I did not have time to get dressed and flew into the crowd of spectators backwards.
Everything was ready at the training ground. The audience hid behind armored shields. Vibegallo was sticking out of a freshly dug trench and valiantly looking into a large stereo tube. Fedor Simeonovich and Cristobal
The junta, with forty-fold binoculars in their hands, spoke softly in Latin. Janus Poluektovich
in a large fur coat stood indifferently aside and picked the snow with a cane. B. The kennel was squatting near the trench with an open book and a fountain pen at the ready. A G. Insightful, hung with
photo and movie cameras, rubbing his frozen cheeks, quacking and banging his feet behind his back.
The sky was clear, the full moon was leaning to the west. Muddy arrows of the aurora appeared, trembling, among the stars and disappeared again. Snow glittered on the plain, and a large rounded cylinder
the autoclave was clearly visible a hundred meters from us.
Vibegallo looked up from the stereo tube, cleared his throat and said:
- Comrades! That-va-ri-schi! What do we observe in this stereotube? Into this stereo tube, comrades,
we, overwhelmed by complex feelings, dying from expectation, are watching how the protective cap begins to automatically unscrew ... Write, write, - he said to B. Nursery. - And more precisely
write ... Automatically, mean, unscrew. In a few minutes, we will have the appearance among us of an ideal person - a chevalier, which means san per e san reprosh ... 18 We will have
here is our model, our symbol, our winged dream! And we, comrades, must meet this giant of needs and abilities in an appropriate way, without discussions, petty squabbles, and other
lunges. So that our dear giant sees us as we really are in a single ranks and close-knit ranks. Let us hide, comrades, our birthmarks, who still have them, and stretch
hand to your dream!
I could see with my naked eye how the lid of the autoclave unscrewed and silently fell into the snow. From the autoclave hit a long, to the very stars, jet of steam.
“I’m giving an explanation for the press…” Vibegallo began, but then a terrible roar was heard.
The earth swam and shook. A huge snow cloud rose up. Everyone fell on top of each other, and I, too, was knocked over and rolled. The roar intensified, and when I struggled, clinging to the tracks of the truck, got to my feet, I saw how terribly, a giant bowl in the dead moonlight was crawling,
17Where you are not capable of anything, there you should not want anything (lat.).18Knight without fear and reproach (French).
turning inward, the edge of the horizon, how armored shields sway menacingly, how they run in all directions, fall and jump up again spectators dumped in the snow. I saw how Fyodor Simeonovich and
Cristobal Junta, covered with rainbow caps of a protective field, back under the onslaught of a hurricane,
how they, raising their hands, are trying to stretch the protection on everyone else, but the whirlwind tears the protection to shreds, and
these shreds rush over the plain like huge soap bubbles and burst in the starry sky. I saw Janus Poluektovich turn up his collar, who was standing with his back to the wind, firmly resting his cane on the bare earth, and looking at his watch. And where was the autoclave,
a tight cloud of steam, illuminated from within by red, was spinning, and the horizon was rapidly curving
steeper and steeper, and it seemed that we were all at the bottom of a colossal jar. And then, very close to the epicenter of this cosmic outrage, Roman suddenly appeared in his green coat,
torn from the shoulders. He swung broadly, threw something large, glittering with bottle glass, into the roaring steam, and immediately fell face down, covering his head with his hands. An ugly, furiously distorted physiognomy of the genie emerged from the cloud, his eyes twisting with rage. Opening his mouth in soundless laughter, he waved his spacious hairy ears, there was a smell of burning, over a snowstorm
the ghostly walls of the magnificent palace shot up, shook and fell, and the genie, turning into
a long tongue of orange flame disappeared into the sky. There was silence for a few seconds. Then the horizon sank with a heavy roar. I was thrown high into the air, and when I came to, I found myself sitting with my hands on the ground, not far from the truck.
The snow is gone. The entire field around was black. Where the autoclave stood a minute ago, a large funnel gaped. White smoke rose from it and smelled of burning.
The audience began to rise to their feet. Everyone's faces were dirty and twisted. Many lost their voices, coughing, spitting and moaning softly. We began to clean, and then it turned out
that some are stripped to their underwear. There was a murmur, then shouts: “Where are the trousers? Why am I without pants?
I was in trousers!”, “Comrades! Nobody saw my watch?”, “And mine!”, “And I also lost it!”, “No tooth, platinum! In the summer I just put it in…”, “Oh, my ring is missing… And the bracelet!”, “Where is Vibegallo? What a disgrace? What does it all mean?”, “To hell with them, with watches and teeth!
Are the people all right? How many of us were there?”, “What actually happened? Some kind of explosion... Genie...
And where is the giant of the spirit?”, “Where is the consumer?”, “Where is Vibegallo, finally?”, “Have you seen the horizon? Do you know what it looks like? ”,“ On a convolution of space, I know these jokes ... ”,“ It’s cold in a T-shirt, let
something…”, “G-where is this Vyb-begallo? Where is that f-fool?"
The earth stirred, and Vibegallo crawled out of the trench. He was without boots.
“Explaining for the press,” he said hoarsely.
But he was not allowed to explain. Magnus Fyodorovich Redkin, who came specifically to find out
finally, what is true happiness, jumped up to him, shaking his clenched fists, and yelled:
- This is charlatanism! You will answer for this! Balagan! Where is my hat? Where is my coat? I will be on you
complain! Where is my hat, I ask?
- In full accordance with the program ... - Vibegallo muttered, looking around. Our dear giant...
Fyodor Simeonovich advanced on him.
“You, m-my dear, are d-burying your t-talent in the ground. Y-you need the Department of Ob-Harrow Magic
enhance. You need to drop your ideal people on enemy b-bases. N-to the fear of the aggressor.
Vibegallo backed away, shielding himself with the sleeve of his coat. Cristobal Hozevich approached him, silently
measuring him with a glance, threw his soiled gloves under his feet and withdrew. Gian Giacomo, hastily creating for himself the appearance of an elegant suit, shouted from afar:
“That’s phenomenal, gentlemen! I always had a certain antipathy towards him, but I could not imagine anything like that ...
Here, finally, G. Insightful and B. Pitomnik sorted out the situation. Until now, smiling uncertainly, they looked into everyone's mouth, hoping to understand something. Then they realized that
everything is far from perfect. Mr. Perspicacious approached Vibegalla with firm steps and, touching him on the shoulder, said in an iron voice:
– Comrade Professor, where can I get my apparatus back? Three cameras and one movie camera.
“And my wedding ring,” added B. Nursery.
“Sorry,” Vibegallo said with dignity. - He wu demandera cand he ura bezuan de wu19.
Wait for an explanation.
Correspondents were shy. Vibegallo turned and walked towards the funnel. Already stood above the funnel
Novel.
“There’s nothing here…” he said from a distance.
The giant consumer was not in the funnel. But there was everything else and much more beyond
Togo. There were cameras and movie cameras, wallets, fur coats, rings, necklaces, trousers and a platinum
tooth. There were Vibegalla's felt boots and Magnus Fedorovich's hat. There was my platinum whistle to call the emergency team. In addition, we found two Moskvich cars there,
three Volga cars, an iron safe with the stamps of a local savings bank, a large piece of fried
meat, two cases of vodka, a case of Zhiguli beer, and an iron bed with nickel-plated balls.
Pulling on his felt boots, Vibegallo, smiling indulgently, declared that now it is possible to start a discussion. “Ask questions,” he said. But the discussion failed. Enraged Magnus Fedorovich called the police. A young sergeant Kovalev rushed in on a gas truck. We all had to sign up to be witnesses. Sergeant Kovalev walked around the funnel, trying to find traces of the criminal.
He found a huge set of false teeth and thought deeply about it. Correspondents who received
their equipment and seeing everything in a new light, attentively listened to Vibegalla, who again
indulged in demagogic nonsense about unlimited and diverse needs. Became
bored, I'm dead.
"Let's go home," Roman said.
“Come on,” I said. Where did you get the genie from?
- Dispatched yesterday from the warehouse. For completely different purposes.
– What happened anyway? Did he overeat again?
“No, Vibegallo is just a fool,” said Roman.
“That's understandable,” I said. “But where does the cataclysm come from?”
“It’s all from here,” said Roman. “I told him a thousand times: “You are programming the standard superegocentric. He will rake in all the material values ​​​​that he can reach, and then he will collapse space, pupate and stop time. And Vibegallo just can't figure it out
that the true giant of the spirit does not so much consume as thinks and feels.
“It's all ash,” he continued when we flew up to the institute. - It's clear to everyone. You are better
tell me, how did Y-Janus know that everything would turn out this way and not otherwise? He foresaw all this.
And huge destruction, and the fact that I will figure out how to kill the giant in the bud ...
“Indeed,” I said. - He even thanked you. in advance.
- Strange, right? Roman said. “We need to think this through carefully.
And we began to think carefully. It took us a long time. Only in spring and only
By chance, we managed to figure everything out.
But that's a completely different story.Story three
19When needed, you will be called (French).
ALL FUCKINGChapter first
When God created time, the Irish say, he created enough of it.
G. BeulEighty-three percent of all days of the year start the same way: an alarm clock rings. This
the ringing flows into the last dreams either with the convulsive chirping of the final perforator, or with angry
peals of Fyodor Simeonovich's bass, then the gnashing of the claws of a basilisk playing in a thermostat.
That morning I dreamed of Modest Matveyevich Kamnoedov. As if he became the head of the computer center and teaches me how to work at Aldan. “Modest Matveyevich,” I told him, “everything that
you advise me, this is some kind of painful nonsense. And he was yelling: “You pr-re-re-stop this for me! you have here
everything dr-r-baby! Beli-berr-r-rda!” Then I realized that it was not Modest Matveyevich, but my alarm clock "Friendship" on eleven stones, with the image of an elephant with a raised trunk, mumbled:
“I hear, I hear,” and he beat his palm on the table around the alarm clock.
The window was wide open, and I saw a bright blue spring sky and felt a sharp spring chill. Pigeons roamed the eaves, tapping. Three flies dangled helplessly around the glass ceiling under the ceiling—probably the first flies of the year. From time to time they
suddenly began to frantically rush from side to side, and half-awake it occurred to me
brilliant idea that the flies are probably trying to jump out of the plane passing through them, and I
sympathized with this hopeless occupation. Two flies sat on the ceiling, and the third disappeared, and then I
finally woke up.
First of all, I threw back the covers and tried to float above the bed. As always, without charging,
without a shower and breakfast, this only led to the fact that the reactive moment pressed me into the sofa bed with force and, somewhere under me, springs jumped off and plaintively rattled. Then I remembered yesterday evening, and I felt very sorry, because today I will be without work all day. Yesterday in
at eleven o'clock in the evening, Cristobal Hozevich came to the electronic room and, as always, connected to Aldan in order to solve another problem of the meaning of life together with him, and after five
minutes "Aldan" caught fire. I don’t know what could be burning there, but the Aldan was out of action for a long time, and therefore, instead of working, I will have to, like all hairy-eared parasites, aimlessly
wandering from department to department, complaining about fate and telling jokes.
I grimaced, sat up in bed, and first took in a full chest of prana mixed with cold
morning air. For some time I waited for the prana to be assimilated, and in accordance with the recommendation
thought about light and joyful. Then I exhaled the cold morning air and began to
a set of morning exercises. I was told that the old school prescribed
yoga gymnastics, but the yoga complex, like the almost forgotten Maya complex, took fifteen to twenty hours a day, and with the appointment of the new President of the USSR Academy of Sciences, the old school
had to give in. The youth of NIICHAVO broke old traditions with pleasure.
On the one hundred and fifteenth jump, my roommate Vitka Korneev fluttered into the room. As always with
morning, he was cheerful, energetic and even complacent. He lashed me on my bare back with a wet towel and began to fly around the room, making movements with his arms and legs, as if swimming in a breaststroke.
At the same time, he told his dreams and immediately interpreted them according to Freud, Merlin and the girl Lenormand.
I went to wash, we cleaned up and went to the dining room.
In the dining room, we took our favorite table under a large, already faded poster: “Be braver,
comrades! Click your jaws! G. Flaubert", uncorked bottles of kefir and began to eat, listening
local news and gossip.
Last night, a traditional spring rally took place on Lysa Gora. The participants behaved
extremely disgraceful. Viy and Homa Brutus went roaming the streets of the night city in an embrace, drunk, molested passers-by, swearing, then Viy stepped on his left eyelid and completely went berserk. He and Homa had a fight, knocked down a newsstand and ended up in the police, where each was given fifteen days for hooliganism. To cut bald Khoma Brut, I had to hold him
six of us, while the bald Viy sat in the corner and giggled offensively. Due to the fact that Homa Brut said during the haircut, the case is referred to the people's court.
Cat Vasily took a spring vacation - to get married. Soon speakers will appear again in Solovets
kittens with hereditary sclerotic memory.
Louis Sedlovoi from the Department of Absolute Knowledge invented some kind of time machine and will report on it at the seminar today.
Vibegallo reappeared at the institute. He walks everywhere and boasts that he has been overshadowed by a titanic
idea. The speech of many monkeys, you see, is reminiscent of human speech, recorded, that is, on a tape recorder and launched backwards at high speed. So he, this one, wrote in Sukhumi
reserve the conversations of baboons and listened to them, letting them go backwards at low speed. It turned out, as he claims, something phenomenal, but he does not say what exactly.
Aldan burned down in the computer center again, but Sashka Privalov is not to blame, it is Junta who, out of principle, has recently been interested only in such problems for which the absence of a solution has been proven.
The aged sorcerer Perun Markovich Cheerful-Dubino from the Department of Militant Atheism
took a vacation for another reincarnation.
In the Department of Eternal Youth, after a long and prolonged illness, the model of an immortal person died.
The Academy of Sciences allocated a certain amount to the institute for the improvement of the territory. For this amount, Modest Matveyevich is going to enclose the institute with a patterned iron grate with allegorical
images and with flower pots on poles, and in the backyard, between the transformer
booth and gas storage, organize a fountain with a nine-meter jet. The Sports Bureau asked
him money for a tennis court - refused, declaring that the fountain was necessary for scientific reflection,
and tennis is dragging and rubbing...
After breakfast, everyone dispersed to the laboratories. I also looked into my room and mournfully wandered
near the Aldan with open entrails, in which unfriendly engineers from
department of technical service. They did not want to talk to me and only sullenly recommended that I go somewhere and mind my own business. I wandered around with friends.
Vitka Korneev kicked me out because I prevented him from concentrating. Roman gave a lecture
trainees. Volodya Pochkin was talking to a correspondent. When he saw me, he was not happy
and shouted: “Ah, there he is! Meet our head of the computing center, he will tell you how ... ”But I very cleverly pretended to be my own duplicate and, having greatly frightened the correspondent, fled. At Edik Amperyan's I was treated to fresh cucumbers, and a lively conversation about the advantages of a gastronomic outlook on life was about to start, but then their distillation burst
cube and they immediately forgot about me.
In complete desperation, I went out into the corridor and ran into U-Janus, who said: "So,"
and, after a pause, he inquired whether we had talked yesterday. “No,” I said, “unfortunately, not conversational
whether." He walked on, and I heard him ask the same standard question at the end of the corridor.
Giano Giacomo.
In the end, I was brought to the absolutes. I got there just before the start of the seminar. Employees, yawning and carefully stroking their ears, were seated in a small conference room. On
in the chairman's place, calmly interlacing his fingers, sat the head of the department, master-academician, all White,
Black and Gray magic, the polymath Maurice-Johann-Lavrenty Pupkov-Zadny, looked favorably at the bustling speaker, who, with two clumsily executed hairy-eared doubles
installed on the exposition stand a certain machine with a saddle and pedals, similar to a simulator
for obese people. I sat down in a corner away from the others, pulled out a notepad and pen, and looked interested.“Nute, sir,” said the master academician, “are you ready?”
“Yes, Maurice Iogannovich,” replied L. Sedlovoi. - Done, Maurice Johannovich.
"Then, shall we get started?" I don't see Smogulia...
“He is on a business trip, Johann Lavrentievich,” they said from the audience.
- Oh, yes, I remember. Exponential research? Yeah, yeah… Well, okay. Today we have
Louis Ivanovich will make a short presentation regarding some possible types of time machines... Am I right, Louis Ivanovich?
- Eh ... Actually ... Actually, I would title my report in such a way that ...
- Oh, well, that's good. Here you call it.
- Thank you. Uh ... I would call it this way: “The feasibility of a time machine for movement during
artificially constructed temporary spaces.
“Very interesting,” said the Master Academician. “However, I remember that I had already
tea when our employee…
Sorry, that's exactly what I wanted to start with.
“Ah, that’s how… Then please, please.”
At first I listened quite carefully. I even got carried away. It turns out that some of these guys were doing curious things. It turns out that some of them to this day fought over
the problem of movement in physical time, however, to no avail. But on the other hand, someone, I didn’t make out the name, someone from the old, famous ones, proved that it is possible to transfer material bodies to ideal worlds, that is, to worlds created by human imagination. Turns out,
In addition to our familiar world with the Riemann metric, the uncertainty principle, the physical vacuum and the drunkard Brutus, there are other worlds that have a pronounced reality.
These are the worlds created by the creative imagination throughout the history of mankind. For example, there are: the world of cosmological ideas of mankind; the world created by painters; and even a semi-abstract world insensitively constructed by generations of composers.
A few years ago, it turns out, a student of that very famous one, assembled a car on which he went to travel to the world of cosmological ideas. For some time, one-way telepathic communication was maintained with him, and he managed to convey that he was on
edge of the flat Earth, sees below the wriggling trunk of one of the three Atlantean elephants and gathers
go down to the turtle. No further information was received from him.
Speaker, Louis Ivanovich Sedlovoi, apparently not a bad scientist, master, who, however, suffers greatly from the remnants of the Paleolithic in his mind and therefore was forced to regularly shave his ears,
designed a machine to travel according to the described time. According to him, there really is a world in which Anna Karenina, Don Quixote, Sherlock Holmes, Grigory Melekhov and even Captain Nemo live and act. This world has its own very curious properties and patterns, and the people who inhabit it are the more vivid, real and individual, the more
talented, passionate and truthfully described their authors of the respective works.
All this interested me very much, because Sedlovoi, carried away, spoke vividly and figuratively.
But then he realized that it was somehow unscientific, hung diagrams and graphs on the stage and
began to expound in a tedious, extremely specialized language about conical decrement
gears, polyhodovye temporal gears and about some penetrating steering wheel. I am very soon
lost the thread of reasoning and began to examine those present.
The master-academician was sleeping majestically, occasionally, purely reflexively, raising his right eyebrow,
as if as a sign of some doubt in the words of the speaker. In the back rows were cut into a functional
sea ​​battle in a Banach space. Two correspondence laboratory assistants diligently wrote down everything
in a row - their faces were frozen in hopeless despair and complete resignation to fate. Someone furtively lit a cigarette, blowing smoke between his knees under the table. In the front row, masters and bachelors listened with their usual attentiveness, preparing questions and comments. Some smiled sarcastically
others showed confusion on their faces. Scientific adviser of Sedlovoi after each phrase
The speaker nodded approvingly. I began to look out the window, but there was still the same fed up storehouse
Yes, occasionally boys with fishing rods ran through.
I woke up when the speaker announced that he had finished the introductory part and would now like to demonstrate the machine in action.
“Interesting, interesting,” said the awakened master academician. - Well, come on ... Will you go yourself?
“You see,” said Sedlovoi, “I would like to stay here to give explanations along the way.
trips. Maybe one of those present...
Those present began to huddle. Obviously, everyone remembered the mysterious fate of the traveler to the edge of the flat Earth. One of the masters offered to send a double. Sedlov replied that
this will be of no interest, because duplicates are not very susceptible to external stimuli and therefore will be poor transmitters of information. From the back rows they asked what kind of external irritations could be. Sedlovoi replied that they were ordinary: visual, olfactory, tactile, acoustic. Then from the back rows they again asked what kind of tactile stimuli
prevail. Sedlovoi spread his hands and said that it depended on the behavior of the traveler in
the places where he goes. In the back rows they said: "Yeah ..." - and no more questions were asked.
The speaker looked around helplessly. In the hall, everyone was looking where and everything to the side. The Master Academician good-naturedly said: “Well? So what? The youth! Well? Who?" Then I got up and silently went to the ma-
tire. I can't stand it when the speaker is in agony: a shameful, pitiful and painful sight.
From the back rows they shouted: “Sashka, where are you going? Come to your senses!" Saddle's eyes sparkled.
“Allow me,” I said.
– Please, please, of course! muttered Sedlovoi, grabbing my finger and dragging me to the car.
“Wait a minute,” I said, pulling away delicately. – Is it for a long time?
- Yes, as you wish! Sedlov exclaimed. - As you tell me, so I will do ... Yes, you
You will manage yourself! Everything is very simple here. He grabbed me again and dragged me back to the car. - This is the steering wheel. This is the clutch pedal to reality. It's a brake. And this is gas. you are a car
do you drive? Very well! Here is the key... Where do you want to go - to the future or to the past?
“To the future,” I said.
“Oh,” he said, disappointed, I thought. – Into the described future... That means all sorts of fantastic novels and utopias. Of course, it's also interesting. Just keep in mind, this future is probably discrete, there must be huge gaps in time, no authors
filled. However, all the same ... So, you will press this key twice. One time now
start, and the second time - when you want to return. Do you understand?
“I understand,” I said. “What if something breaks in it?”
- Absolutely safe! He waved his hands. - As soon as something in it deteriorates, at least
one speck of dust will fall between the contacts, you will instantly return here.
“Go ahead, young man,” said the Master Academician. – Tell us what is there, in the future, ha ha ha…
I climbed into the saddle, trying not to look at anyone and feeling very stupid.
“Press, press…” the speaker whispered passionately.
I pressed the key. It was obviously something like a starter. The car jerked, grunted and began to tremble evenly.
“The shaft is bent,” Sedlova whispered with annoyance. - Well, nothing, nothing ... Turn on the speed. Here
So. And now gas, gas...
I gave it gas while smoothly depressing the clutch. The world began to fade. The last thing I heard in the hall was the complacent question of the Master Academician: “And in what way will we be behind him?
observe?..” And the hall disappeared.Chapter Two
The only difference between Time and any of the three spatial dimensions is
that our consciousness moves along it.
H. J. WellsAt first the car was bouncing and I was preoccupied with keeping myself in the saddle by wrapping my legs around the frame and clinging to the steering bar with all my might. Out of the corner of my eye, I vaguely saw around some luxurious ghostly buildings, muddy green plains and a cold, unheated star in a gray fog not far from the zenith. Then I realized that shaking and jumps occur
because I took my foot off the accelerator, engine power (just like it happens on a car)
not enough, and therefore the car moves jerkily, in addition, every now and then bumping into the ruins of ancient and medieval utopias. I stepped on the gas, the movement immediately became smooth, and I was finally able to
get comfortable and look around.
A ghostly world surrounded me. Huge buildings of multi-colored marble, decorated
colonnades, towering among small rural-looking houses. Around in complete silence
loaves swayed. Fat transparent herds grazed on the grass, on the hillocks sat
gray-haired shepherds. All, as one, they read books and old manuscripts. Then two transparent people appeared next to me, stood in poses and began to speak. Both of them were barefoot, crowned
wreaths and wrapped in folded chitons. One held a shovel in his right hand and a roll of parchment in his left. The other was leaning on a pickaxe and playing absently with a huge copper inkpot hanging from his belt. They spoke strictly in turn and, as it seemed to me at first,
friend. But very soon I realized that they were talking to me, although not one of them even looked at
my side. I listened. The one with the shovel gave a long and monotonous exposition of the fundamentals of political
of the beautiful country of which he was a citizen. The device was extraordinary
democratic, there could be no question of any coercion of citizens (he several times with special
emphasized this), everyone was rich and free from worries, and even the last tiller had no less than three slaves. When he stopped to rest and lick his lips
the one with the inkwell entered. He boasted that he had just worked his three hours as a ferryman on the river, had not taken a penny from anyone, because he did not know what money was, and now he was heading under the canopy of the jets to indulge in versification.
They talked for a long time - judging by the speedometer, for several years - and then suddenly disappeared immediately, and it became empty. The still sun shone through the ghostly buildings. Suddenly, heavy aircraft with membranous wings, like those of pterodactyls, slowly floated low above the ground. At first it seemed to me that they were all on fire, but then I noticed that
their smoke comes from large conical chimneys. Massively waving their wings, they flew over me,
ash rained down, and someone dropped a knotty log on top of me.
Some changes began to take place in the luxurious buildings around me. They don't have columns.
decreased, and the architecture remained as before luxurious and ridiculous, but new colors appeared, and marble, in my opinion, was replaced by some more modern material, and instead of blind statues
and busts on the roofs, gleaming devices appeared, similar to the antennas of radio telescopes.
There were more people on the streets, a huge number of cars appeared. Herds with readers disappeared
shepherds, but the bread kept swaying, although there was still no wind. I hit the brakes and stopped.
Looking around, I realized that I was standing with the car on a moving sidewalk. The people around and
kishel - the most diverse people. For the most part, however, these people were some kind of unreal, much less real than powerful, complex, almost silent mechanisms. So, when such a mechanism accidentally ran into a person, the collision did not occur. The cars were of little interest to me, probably because on the frontal armor of each sat an inspired do
translucency, an inventor who explained at length the structure and purpose of his offspring.
No one listened to the inventors, and it seems that they did not turn to anyone in particular.
It was more interesting to watch people. I saw big guys in overalls walking around in
hugging, cursing and yelling non-melodious songs to bad verses. Every now and then some people came across who were only partially dressed: say, in a green hat and a red jacket on a naked body
(nothing else); or in yellow boots and a colorful tie (no pants, no shirt, not even underwear); or in elegant shoes on bare feet. The people around treated them calmly, and I was embarrassed
until I remembered that some authors tend to write something like
“The door opened, and a slender, muscular man in a shaggy cap and dark
glasses." There were also people normally dressed, however, in suits of a strange cut, and here and there
a tanned, bearded man in a spotless white chlamys pushed his way through the crowd with a ketman or some kind of collar in one hand and an easel or a pencil case in the other. For carriers
the chlamys looked confused, they shied away from the many-legged mechanisms and looked around in a hunted way.
Except for the mutterings of the inventors, it was pretty quiet. Most of the people were silent. On the corner, two young men were fiddling with some kind of mechanical device. One confidently said: “Design thought cannot stand still. This is the law of the development of society. We will invent
his. We will definitely invent. In spite of bureaucrats like Chinushin and conservatives like Tverdolobov.” Another young man brought his own: “I found how to use indelible polystructural fiber tires with degenerate amine bonds and incomplete oxygen groups here.
But I do not yet know how to use a subthermal neutron regenerative reactor. Misha,
Bear! What about the reactor? Looking closely at the device, I easily recognized the bicycle.
The pavement took me out into a huge square filled with people and lined with spaceships of the most diverse designs. I got off the sidewalk and pulled the car. At first I didn't understand what was happening. Music played, speeches were made, here and there, towering above the crowd, curly, ruddy youths, with difficulty managing the unruly strands of hair, continuously falling
on the forehead, penetratingly read poetry. The verses were either familiar or nasty, but from the eyes of numerous listeners stingy male, bitter female and bright children's tears were abundantly dripping.
Stern men hugged each other tightly and, moving their jaws on their cheekbones, clapped each other.
on the backs. Since many were not dressed, the clapping sounded like applause. Two taut lieutenants with tired but kind eyes dragged a polished man past me, wrapping